
The Flood are fictional parasitic alien life forms in the ''Halo'' video game series. They are introduced in ''Halo: Combat Evolved'' as a secondary enemy to the game's protagonist, Master Chief, and return in ''Halo 2''and ''Halo 3'' to fill the same role. The Flood are driven by a desire to infest sentient life they encounter, and are depicted as such a threat that the ancient Forerunner were forced to kill most of themselves and all other sentient life nearly 100,000 years before the beginning of ''Halo'' in an effort to starve the Flood to death.

The player's discovery of the Flood in ''Halo: Combat Evolved'' is a major plot twist that is kept suspenseful and tense, and was one of the surprises reviewers noted positively upon release. The Flood's return in ''Halo 2'' and ''Halo 3'' was less enthusiastically praised. Reaction to the faction varied; while some publications found the Flood too derivative and a clichéd element of science fiction, ''Wizard Magazine'' rated them among the greatest villains of all time.

Game development
The Flood were added early in the game development stage of ''Halo: Combat Evolved'', before the game had made its jump from the Macintosh platform and Bungie was bought by Microsoft; a design for one Flood form appeared as early as 1997.;; The early design for the Flood was done by Bungie artist and writer Robert McLees, who considers himself &quot;the architect&quot; of the Flood;;; the Flood's roots are reflected in some concept art of a &quot;fungal zombie&quot; that McLees did for the earlier Bungie game ''Marathon 2: Durandal''.;; At one point, the ringworld ''Halo'' featured dinosaur-like terrestrial creatures, but due to gameplay constraints, these were dropped. An additional consideration was that Bungie felt the presence of other native species would dilute the impact and surprise of the Flood.;; Commenting upon the inception of the Flood, Bungie staff member Chris Butcher noted that &quot;the idea behind the Flood as the forgotten peril that ended a galaxy-spanning empire is a pretty fundamental tenet of good sci-fi. Yeah, and bad sci-fi too.&quot;;;

Physiology
The &quot;Infection&quot; stage of the Flood.
The Flood are depicted as having a complicated lifecycle; small, base forms of Flood infect and mutate hosts into other forms, which ultimately repeat the cycle by spawning the smaller forms. The largest self-contained form that the Flood can produce itself, without using other biomasses,;; is an &quot;Infection form&quot;. As its name suggests, the Infection form homes in on hosts (living or dead), attempting to drive sharp spines into the host and tap into the nervous system. This tap causes the host to be incapacitated, while the Infection form burrows into the host's body and begins the mutation process, bringing the host under Flood control.;; Depending on the size or condition of the body, the Infection form mutates the hapless host into various specialized forms in the continual drive for more food. 

The Flood are also seen to create forms for tasks other than finding sustenance. In ''Halo: Combat Evolved'', the Flood create &quot;Brain forms&quot;; these spongy creatures, resembling a large bag of flesh with tentacles, can be used to interrogate victims, stripping information from the mind of the host before eventually assimilating the host into itself entirely.;;;; In the ''Halo Graphic Novel'', Flood are seen piling dead matter together in order to form a Gravemind; this form serves as a central intelligence for the infection, and is first encountered in ''Halo 2''.

Appearances
=''Halo: Combat Evolved''=

The Flood make their surprise appearance more than halfway through ''Halo: Combat Evolved'';';s campaign, during the mission &quot;343 Guilty Spark&quot;. The Master Chief is sent on an extraction mission by Cortana to try and find Captain Characters in the Halo series#Jacob Keyes|Jacob Keyes, who disappears in a swamp while looking for a weapons cache.;; The Master Chief finds that the Covenant have released the Flood accidentally, and the sheer numbers of the parasite overwhelm Keyes and his squad. While most of the UNSC Marines are converted to Combat forms, Keyes is interrogated by the Flood in an attempt to learn the location of Earth. Keyes successfully resists,;; but is assimilated into a Brain form before the Master Chief can rescue him. The emergence of the Flood prompts Halo's &quot;Monitor&quot;, 343 Guilty Spark, to enlist the help of the Master Chief in activating Halo's defenses and preventing a Flood outbreak.;343 Guilty Spark: Greetings. I am the Monitor of installation 04. I am 343 Guilty Spark. Someone has released the Flood. My function is to prevent it from leaving this installation. But I require your assistance. Come. This way. - ; When Master Chief learns of the devastation that Halo would cause if activated, he detonates the ''United Nations Space Command#Pillar of Autumn|Pillar of Autumn'';';s engines, destabilizing the ring and preventing the Flood from escaping.

In ''Halo'', the Flood appear in three main forms. The largest hosts, namely humans and Covenant Elites, are turned by the Infection forms into &quot;Combat forms&quot;, which are described as extremely powerful and resilient warriors. Combat forms are able to resist extreme punishment while utilizing either the weapons of their hosts or the long, whip-like tentacles developed during their mutation.;; If a host is unsuitable for combat it will mutate into a &quot;Carrier form&quot;, which transports and spreads more Infection forms. The upper-body of Carrier form swells into a bulbous sac while the legs remain intact. When it moves close enough to a potential host, the Carrier form explodes like a grenade, both releasing its contents and killing anything within range.

=''Halo Graphic Novel''=

The 2006 one-shot ''Halo Graphic Novel'' expands upon the Flood's release on Halo (megastructure)#Installation 04|Installation 04 in two stories. The first, ''Last Voyage of the Infinite Succor'', takes place at the same times as the Master Chief hunts for Keyes during ''Halo: Combat Evolved''. The Flood manage to pilot a Covenant dropship off Halo, and crash-land the vessel in the hangar of a Covenant agricultural ship, ''Covenant (Halo)#Infinite Succor|Infinite Succor''. Successfully assimilating most of the Covenant and wildlife aboard the ship, the Flood are stopped by a Covenant strike team led by Characters in the Halo series#Rtas 'Vadumee|Rtas 'Vadumee, who sets the ship on a course into the nearby sun.;; The second story, &quot;Breaking Quarantine&quot;, details the escape of Sergeant Characters in the Halo series#Avery Johnson|Avery Johnson from the clutches of the Flood, immediately after Keyes' squad is overrun during ''Halo''. Due to a pre-existing medical condition called Boren's Syndrome, the Flood parasites cannot infect Johnson and attempt to kill him instead.;; Whereas the Flood are only hinted at being intelligent in ''Halo'',;343 Guilty Spark: The Flood are already hard at work repairing your vessel. Its parasitic nature belies the Flood's intelligence. - ; the ''Halo Graphic Novel'' shows the Flood have a hive mind, assimilating the knowledge of their hosts rapidly.;Legate: ...In addition, they have set up patrols throughout the ''Infinite Succor''. Thus it seems they also absorb the knowledge of those they infect. - ;

=''Halo 2'' and ''Ghosts of Onyx''=

The Flood return in ''Halo 2'', released accidentally on Delta Halo.;Truth: We are, all of us, gravely concerned. The release of the parasite was unexpected, unfortunate, but there is no need to panic. - ; The Flood on Delta Halo are led by the Gravemind, a massive creature that dwells in the bowels of the ring. Gravemind rescues both the Master Chief and the Arbiter when they are nearly killed in separate engagements, and sends each in different places in an effort to stop the Covenant Hierarchs from activating the ring.;Gravemind: If you will not hear the truth, then I will show it to you. There is still time to stop the key from turning, but first it must be found. You will search one likely spot... / ...and you will search another. Fate had us meet as foes, but this ring will make us brothers. - ; In the meantime, Gravemind infests the human ship ''United Nations Space Command#In Amber Clad|In Amber Clad'' and crashes it into the Covenant space station of ''High Charity''.;Cortana: Flood-controlled dropships are touching down all over the city. That creature beneath the Library, that &quot;Gravemind&quot;, used us. We were just a diversion; In Amber Clad was always its intended vector. - ; Once there, the Flood sweep through the city, before Gravemind himself appears and begins questioning the A.I. Cortana.;Gravemind: Silence fills the empty grave, now that I have gone. But my mind is not at rest, for questions linger on. Now ''I'' will ask, and ''you'' will answer. - ;

=''Halo 3''=

An infected Covenant Covenant (Halo)#Brutes|Brute.
The Flood reappear in the ''Halo 3'' mission &quot;Floodgate&quot;, on board a damaged ship that managed to escape from the quarantine around Delta Halo. While the infestation of Earth is prevented by vitrification of half the African continent,;Lord Hood: And you, Ship Master, just glassed half a continent! - ; the Gravemind follows the Master Chief and his allies to Halo (megastructure)#The Ark|the Ark aboard the infested ''High Charity''. Once again, the Master Chief, Arbiter and Gravemind forge an alliance to stop the High Prophet of Truth from activating all the ringworlds, but as soon as Truth is killed, Gravemind quickly turns on the Chief and Arbiter once again.;Arbiter: (Gravemind surrounds them) We trade one enemy for another. - ; The Master Chief fights his way to the center of ''High Charity'', freeing Cortana and destroying the city, but Gravemind attempts to rebuild himself on the Halo under construction by the Ark.;Gravemind: Do I give life or take it? Who is victim? And who is foe? / Cortana: It's trying to... rebuild itself on this ring! - ; Realizing that lighting the ring will destroy only the local Flood infestation and spare the galaxy, the Master Chief, Arbiter, Cortana and Sgt. Johnson proceed to Halo's control room; despite Gravemind's best efforts, the ring fires. This ends the threat of the Flood- for a time; Gravemind confidently predicts that the Flood's progress has only been temporarily slowed.;Gravemind: Resignation is my virtue. Like water I ebb; defeat is simply an addition of time to a sentence I never deserved... but you imposed. - ;

The Flood appear in ''Halo 3'' with new abilities and forms. A new, mutable Flood combat form appears, called the &quot;Pure Form.&quot; Depending on the situation, these forms can mutate into even more specialized types. According to Bungie, these creatures are formed when the Flood gain access to large enough stocks of calcium, which it uses to form a framework for biomass collected from other species.

Cultural impact
=Merchandise=
The Flood have been featured in several series of ''Halo'' action figures, produced by Joyride Studios. For ''Halo: Combat Evolved'', Joyride produced a Carrier Form and Infection form bundle.;; ''Halo 2''s series contains both a human Combat Form and Infection form (bundled with the Master Chief), which were released after the video game had hit shelves.;;;;

=Critical reception=
The surprise appearance of the Flood during ''Halo: Combat Evolved'' was seen as an important plot twist.;; Actress Aisha Tyler said that &quot;[every time the Flood appear], even though I've played it a million times, is a totally terrifying moment.&quot;;; Gamasutra, writing about video game plots, gives the example of the Flood not only as an important reversal to the story of ''Halo'', but a textbook example of how games and their stories are made more interesting by twists in the plot.;;

Despite this, the response to the presence of the Flood in ''Halo 2'' and ''Halo 3'' was mixed. A panel of online reviewers noted that the Flood appeared in ''Halo 2'' for no obvious reasons, and were simply described as &quot;aggravating&quot; to play against.;; Similarly, reviewers including Victor Godinez of ''Dallas News'' felt that the Flood were too derivative of other sci-fi stereotypes, and functioned as &quot;space zombies&quot;.;;; ''Gamecritics.com'' noted in their review of ''Halo 3'' that even though the Flood looked better than ever, their single strategy of rushing the player proved tedious.;;

Lee Hammock, writer of the ''Halo Graphic Novel'' story ''The Last Voyage of the Infinite Succor'', described the basis of the story as a way to showcase the true danger of the Flood as an intelligent menace, rather than something the player happens upon and shoots. Hammock also stated that the story would prove the intelligent nature of the Flood, and &quot;hopefully euthanize the idea that they are just space zombies&quot;;;; this treatment was received positively by critics.;; In 2006, ''Wizard Magazine'' ranked the Flood as the 77th Greatest Villains of all time.;);

References

;
-->;
External links
*[http://halo.wikia.com/wiki/Main_Page Halopedia] - Halo Knowledge center
*[http://halo.wikia.com/wiki/Flood Halopedia - Flood] - Halopedia Page on the Flood
*[http://halosm.bungie.org/story/flood.html Bungie.org Flood Archives]
*[http://forums.bungie.org/halo/archive21.pl?read=633807 Flood Discussion @ Bungie Forums]




Category:Fictional parasites
Category:Fictional undead
Category:Halo factions
Category:Fictional extraterrestrials

es:Flood (Halo)
fr:Parasites (Halo)
fi:Flood