
;

| company_slogan = &quot;הכי בבית בעולם&quot;;Literally: &quot;The most at home in the world&quot;;Translated: &quot;Home away from home&quot;
| founded= 1948
| headquarters =Lod, Israel
| key_people = Israel &quot;Izzy&quot; Borovich (Chairman);Haim Romano (CEO)
| hubs = Ben Gurion International Airport
| secondary_hubs = 
| focus_cities = 
| frequent_flyer = #Matmid Frequent Flyer program|Matmid
| lounge = King David Lounge
| alliance =
| subsidiaries = Sun D'Or;[http://www.elal.com/ELAL/English/AboutElAl/Subsidiaries.htm El Al &quot;Subsidiaries&quot;];
| website= http://www.elal.com/
}}
El Al Boeing 777-200ER

El Al Israel Airlines (, ''skyward'') (TASE: [http://www.tase.co.il/TASEEng/General/Company/companyDetails.htm?companyId=001152 ELAL]) is Israel's largest airline and flag carrier.;;;; El Al operates regular international passenger and cargo flights between its hub at Ben Gurion International Airport in Tel Aviv and destinations in Africa, Asia, Europe, and North America, as well as domestic flights to Eilat.;;

Since its inaugural flight from Geneva to Tel Aviv in September 1948 the airline has steadily grown to the point where it now serves 48 destinations on four continents.;; As the national carrier of Israel, El Al has played an important role in Israel's humanitarian rescue efforts, airlifting Jews from Ethiopia, Yemen, and other countries where their lives were at risk.The airline holds the world record for the highest number of passengers on a commercial aircraft, a record set by Operation Solomon when Jewish refugees were transported from Ethiopia. El Al is widely acknowledged as the world's most secure airline, after foiling many attempted hijackings and terror attacks through its vigilant security protocols.;;;;

History
= Early years=
In September 1948 Israel's first president, Chaim Weizmann, attended a conference in Geneva, Switzerland.Weizmann was scheduled to fly back to Israel in a government aircraft;, but due to an embargo imposed on Israel at the time, this was not possible. A C-54 military transport aircraft was instead converted into a civilian plane to transport Weizmann home. The aircraft was painted with the El Al/Israel National Aviation Company logo and fitted with extra fuel tanks to enable a non-stop flight from Geneva to Israel. It departed from Ekron Air Base on September 28, and returned to Israel on September 30. After the flight, the aircraft was repainted and returned to military use.;; 

The airline was incorporated and became Israel's official carrier on 15 November 1948, although it used borrowed aircraft until February 1949, when two unpressurised DC-4s were purchased from American Airlines. The acquisition was funded by the Israeli government, the Jewish Agency, and other Jewish organizations. The first plane arrived at Lod Airport on April 3, 1949. Aryeh Pincus, a lawyer from South Africa, was elected head of the company. The first international flight, from Tel Aviv to Paris (refueling in Rome), took place on July 31, 1949.;;; By the end of 1949, the airline had flown passengers to London and Johannesburg. A regular service to London was inaugurated in the middle of 1950.Later that year, El Al acquired Universal Airways, which was owned by South African Zionists. A state-run domestic airline, Israel Inland Airlines, was founded in which El Al had a 50% stake.;;

El Al's cargo service was inaugurated in 1950 and initially relied on military surplus C-46 aircraft. The same year the airline initiated charter services to the USA, followed by scheduled flights soon afterwards.; From its earliest days the operation of the airline in keeping with Jewish tradition has been a source of friction; when the Israeli prime minister David Ben Gurion was forming his first coalition, the religious parties would not join unless Ben Gurion promised that El Al would serve only kosher food on its flights and would not fly on the Jewish Sabbath.;;
El Al's 1958 advert promoting non-stop transatlantic services

As the national carrier, the airline was involved in several covert operations.; In the early 1950s, El Al airlifted over 160,000 immigrants to Israel from India, Iran, Iraq and Yemen as part of Operation Magic Carpet and Operation Ezra and Nehemiah.;In 1960, Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann was captured and flown from Argentina to Israel on an El Al aircraft.;;

In 1955, after using unreliable and noisy Lockheed Constellations for several years, the airline purchased two Bristol Britannia aircraft. El Al was the second airline in the world to fly this plane, after the British Overseas Airways Corporation. In 1958, El Al ran a newspaper advertisement in the US featuring a picture of a &quot;shrunken&quot; Atlantic Ocean (&quot;Starting Dec. 23, the Atlantic Ocean will be 20% smaller&quot;) to promote its non-stop transatlantic flights.;; This was a bold step: the airline industry had never used images of the ocean in its advertising because of the widespread public fear of airline crashes. The advertisement, which ran only once, proved effective. Within a year, El Al's sales tripled.;;

= Expansion in the 1960s=
Despite the purchase of its Britannias and inauguration of non-stop transatlantic flights the airline remained unprofitable.;; When Efraim Ben-Arzi took over the company in the late 1950s, the Britannias were replaced by de Havilland Comet 4, Boeing 707, and Douglas DC-8 jets. The first year that El Al turned a profit was 1960. That year, more than 50 percent of the passengers flying into Israel arrived on El Al flights.; On 15 June 1961, the airline set a world record for the longest non-stop commercial flight: an El Al Boeing 707 flew from Tel Aviv to New York, coveringin 9 hours and 33 minutes.;
By this time El Al was carrying 56,000 passengers a year - on a par with Qantas and ahead of established airlines like Loftleidir. In 1961, El Al ranked 35th in the world in the number of accumulated passenger miles.;;
El Al's success continued into the late 1960s. In 1968, regular flights to Bucharest were inaugurated, and cargo flights began to Europe and the USA. The airline also established a catering subsidiary, Teshet Tourism and Aviation Services Ltd. All these ventures brought in a profit of $2 million that year.;

= Hijacking and terrorism=
In 1968, El Al experienced the first of many acts of terrorism against the airline. On July 23, the first and only successful hijacking of an El Al aircraft took place, when a 707 carrying 10 crew and 38 passengers was taken over by three members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP). The aircraft was en route from Rome to Lod. The hijackers diverted it to Algiers. Bargaining with the hijackers went on for 40 days. Both the hijackers and the passengers, including 21 Israeli hostages, were eventually freed.;; On December 26 of the same year, two PFLP terrorists attacked an El Al aircraft at Athens Airport, killing an Israeli mechanic.; The Israeli Defense Forces retaliated on December 29 with a night-time raid on Lebanon's Beirut Airport, destroying 14 planes on the ground belonging to Middle East Airlines, Trans Mediterranean Airways and Lebanese International Airways.;;
On 18 February 1969, Palestinians attacked an El Al plane at Zurich Airport killing the copilot and injuring the pilot. One Palestinian attacker was killed and others were convicted but later released.;; Between September and December 1969, bomb and grenade attacks occurred at El Al offices in Athens, Berlin, and Brussels.; This wave of violence culminated in the failed hijacking of an El Al 707 by Patrick Arguello and Leila Khaled on September 6 1970, as part of the Dawson's Field hijackings.;;

= 1970s and 1980s=
An El Al Boeing 707 touches down at Zurich Airport in 1982

El Al acquired its first Boeing 747 in 1971. Many felt it was a risky purchase,; given the high cost of the plane and fear of attacks, but El Al operations flourished after the purchase. Another 747 was delivered in 1973 and was used to inaugurate non-stop service from Tel Aviv to New York. In the air for 13 hours, and flying against prevailing winds, it was recorded as the longest commercial flight in the world.;; 

In the mid-1970s, El Al began to schedule flights from airports outside of Israel that departed on the Jewish sabbath and landed in Israel after it had finished. The religious parties in the government claimed that this was a violation of Jewish law and contrary to the agreement signed in the early days of the state, in which El Al promised to refrain from flying on the sabbath. In 1981, the newly re-elected prime minister Menachem Begin, promised to abide by the agreement. Outraged, the secular community threatened to boycott the airline. In August 1982, El Al workers blocked Orthodox and Hassidic Jews from entering the airport.; 

In 1977, El Al established a charter subsidiary then known as El Al Charter Services Ltd., but later renamed Sun D'Or International Airlines Ltd. Two years earlier, the airline had suffered its first losses since the late 1950s, largely a product of the global recession. The management changed three times towards the end of the 1970s, until Itzhak Shander was named president.; As the political situation in Iran deteriorated, El Al began to airlift Jews to Israel. All the airline's infrastructure in Iran was eventually destroyed.;
El Al flights to Cairo were inaugurated in April 1980, following the Israel-Egypt Peace Treaty.;In late 1982, after a long period of labor disputes and strikes, El Al operations were suspended. The government appointed Amram Blum to run the company, which lost $123.3 million in the fiscal year ending April 1983.;; The airline also sold its stake in Arkia at this time.;;

Operations resumed in January 1983 under receivership. The government purchased two new Boeing 737 aircraft and announced plans to acquire four Boeing 767 jets at the cost of $200 million. Within four years, El-Al was profitable again.; It broke another record, since then surpassed, in May 1988 with a non-stop flight from Los Angeles to Tel Aviv, a journey ofin 13 hours and 41 minutes.;; Flights to Poland and Yugoslavia were inaugurated in 1989.;

= 1990s and early 2000s=
El Al operated Boeing 747-200's between the 1970s to 1990s, now using the aircraft for cargo purposes

In January 1990, North American Airlines began providing feeder services in the US to El Al gateways. El Al held a 24.9 percent stake in the airline until selling it back to Dan McKinnon in July 2003. By this time, El Al was operating a fleet of 20 aircraft, including nine Boeing 747s, and had begun replacing its aging Boeing 707s with the Boeing 757. Early that year, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, El Al inaugurated regular flights to Moscow. No airlifts from the former Soviet Union were possible at the time but permission was granted in 1991. Charter flights commenced in August 1991, with immigrants also occupying all available seats on El Al's scheduled routes. In cooperation with Aeroflot, El Al flewmore than 400,000 Jewish immigrants to Israel within a three year period.;;
;

On 24 May 1991, an El Al Boeing 747 airlifted a record-breaking 1,087 Ethiopian Jews from Addis Ababa to Israel under the framework of Operation Solomon.;; Flights were inaugurated to the Far East and, in 1995, El Al signed its first codesharing agreement with American Airlines.; In February 1995, the receivership under which the airline had technically been operating since 1982 came to an end.;; In June 1996, El Al recorded another milestone: its first flight from Israel to Amman, Jordan.; 

Ethiopian Jews board an El Al aircraft during Operation Solomon 

In 1996, El Al recorded $83.1 million in losses, due to the resumption of terrorist activities and the government's open-skies policy.; To keep its planes flying during this period, El Al introduced flights &quot;to nowhere&quot;: passengers were offered various kinds of in-flight entertainment as the plane circled the Mediterranean. One-day shopping trips to London and visits to religious sites in eastern Europe were also promoted.;

In 1997, El Al opened a separate cargo division.;;; El Al's first Boeing 777 embarked on its maiden flight in March 2000. Later that year the controversy over flights on Shabbat erupted again, when the airline announced that it was losing $55 million a year by grounding its planes on Saturdays. After the first phase of the long-delayed privatization of the company commenced in June 2003 and 15 percent of El Al's shares were listed on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange the policy regarding sabbath flights was expected to change.;; 

In 2004 Knafaim-Arkia Holdings, the parent company of Arkia Israel Airlines, acquired a large stake in Arkia and intended to seek fullownership.;; However, due to Israeli anti-trust laws, Knafaim-Arkia was forced to sell its shares.;;;

= El Al today=
El Al employees welcome the airline's newest Boeing 777, named Sderot, to Ben Gurion Airport in July 2007

As of 2007, the company employs 5,417 staff globally and has a fleet of over 30 aircraft.;; 
During 2005 the airline transported 3.5 million passengers, a rise from 3.2 million in 2004 and 2.8 million in 2003.;
;
In 2006, El Al posted a $44.6 million dollar loss on revenues of $1.665 billion.;[http://www.standardpoors.co.il/companies.asp?pageID=2&amp;CleanFormat=0&amp;companyID=118&amp;section=4&amp;FDTab=1 Standard &amp; Poor's El Al Income Statement Data]; The company is facing four lawsuits, two of which have been approved as class actions, that could potentially cost the company a total of $176.2 million.;;; El Al spends $100 million a year to conform with the airline security measures required by Israel's Shin Bet security service.;; In early 2007, El Al opened a new King David Lounge at Charles de Gaulle Airport. New lounges at Heathrow Airport and John F. Kennedy International Airport are expected to open in late 2007.;;

In 2007, El Al invested NIS 1 billion in the purchase of two new Boeing 777-200s. The aircraft are fitted with upgraded seats and touch-screen entertainment systems. The first aircraft, named &quot;Sderot&quot;, completed its maiden voyage from New York to Tel Aviv on 26 July 2007. The second, &quot;Kiryat Shmona&quot;, was delivered at the end of August 2007.;;;; As of March 2007, El Al's major shareholders are Knafaim Holdings (42%), the State of Israel (13%), and the Employee Union (8%).;

Religious issues
El Al caters to the needs of religious Jewish passengers flying to and from Israel by serving only kosher food (under rabbinical supervision; glatt kosher food is also available on request). On long-haul flights, passenger-led Jewish prayer services are held at the back of the plane. El Al does not fly on Shabbat, despite the financial losses that this entails. An estimated 20 to 30 percent of the passengers are Haredi. This sector tends to fly during specific seasons of the year (before and after Jewish holidays), and has certain preferred destinations, such as New York and Toronto. Operating on Shabbat could result in a Haredi boycott that would pose a major financial blow.;; After an airport strike in November 2006, El Al allowed some planes to take off on Shabbat to reduce the backlog. The Haredi community responded with an immediate boycott.;; On 5 January 2007, El Al signed an agreement with the Haredi community that it would not fly on Shabbat.;;

El Al security
As a terrorist target for many decades, El Al employs stringent security procedures, both on the ground and on board its aircraft. These effective, though sometimes controversial, procedures have won El Al a reputation for security.;; 

= Airport security measures=
Passengers are asked to report three hours before departure. All El Al terminals around the world are closely monitored for security. There are plain-clothes agents and fully armed police or military personnel who patrol the premises for explosives, suspicious behavior, and other threats. Inside the terminal, passengers and their baggage are checked by a trained team. El Al security procedures require that all passengers be interviewed individually prior to boarding, allowing El Al staff to identify possible security threats. Passengers will be asked questions about where they are coming from, the reason for their trip, their job or occupation, and whether they have packed their bags themselves. The likelihood of potential terrorists remaining calm under such questioning is believed to be low(see also ''Microexpression'').;;
At the check-in counter the passengers' passports and tickets are closely examined. A ticket without a sticker from the security checkers will not be accepted. At passport control passengers' names are checked against information from the FBI, Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS), Scotland Yard, Shin Bet, and Interpol databases. Luggage is screened and sometimes hand searched. In addition, bags are put through a decompression chamber simulating pressures during flight that could trigger explosives.;; El Al is the only airline in the world that passes all luggage through such a chamber.;; Even at overseas airports, El Al security agents conduct all luggage searches personally, even if they are supervised by government or private security firms.;;

= Flight security measures=
Undercover agents (sometimes referred to as sky marshals) carrying concealed firearms sit amongst the passengers on every international El Al flight.;; Most El Al pilots are former Israeli Air Force fighter pilots, and all El Al flight crew members are trained in hand-to-hand combat. Most El Al employees, male and female, have served in the Israel Defense Forces (IDF), as Israeli citizens are drafted at the age of 18.;;

El Al Boeing 777

The cockpits in all El Al aircraft have double doors to prevent entry by unauthorized persons. A code is required to access the doors, and the second door will only be opened after the first has closed and the person has been identified by the Captain or First Officer.; Furthermore, there are reinforced steel floors separating the passenger cabin from the baggage hold.;; This is intended to strengthen the plane in case of an explosion.

Following an attempt to shoot down an Israeli airliner in 2002,;; all aircraft in the fleet have been equipped with an infrared countermeasures system called 'Flight Guard', developed by Israeli Aerospace Industries to defend them against anti-aircraft missiles.;;;; ;;Although comparable systems such as CAMPS are now available for civilian aircraft, there is no information to date about any other airlines deploying such a system. Switzerland and other European countries have expressed concern that flares dropped by the Israeli system could cause fires in the vicinity of an airport.;;However none of the higher risk countries that the El-Al aircraft fly to have raised any concerns.

= Security controversy and passenger profiling=
Critics of El Al note that its security checks on passengers include racial profiling;; and have argued that such profiling is unfair, irrational, and degrading to those subject to such screening.Supporters of El Al argue that there is nothing inherently racist about passenger profiling and that special scrutiny of Muslims may often be necessary for security purposes.

The airline was also criticised by the Hungarian courts for refusing to search luggage with the passenger present, acting against Hungarian domestic laws which stipulate that only authorized officials are able to undertake such searches.;

Despite these criticisms, it has been as a result of these stringent security measures that no El Al aircraft has been successfully hijacked since 1968.El Al's security protocol has proven highly effective and is now a model for airlines around the world.;;

Destinations


El Al serves destinations on four continents with a particularly developed network to Europe. The airline serves a number of gateway North American cities and has recently extended its service to include non-stop service to Los Angeles and Miami.Over the past few years; El Al has expanded its service to cover the Far East while retaining its limited coverage of Africa.;;;;
El Al's service to several of its destinations is complicated by a special disadvantage. A number of the nearby countries, most importantly Saudi Arabia, refuse to allow El Al airplanes to fly over their territory. The necessary re-routing of the flight paths can add as much as ninety minutes to flying time. In recent years this situation has been somewhat improved by aviation agreements with Cyprus, Egypt, and Jordan. In late 2007, the airline announced that it wishes to begin flights to Tokyo, Shanghai or South America during 2008, and would like to begin domestic connections to the north of the country.;;;;

Fleet
El Al has an all-Boeing fleet which consists of the following aircraft:
;
{| class=&quot;toccolours sortable&quot; border=&quot;1&quot; cellpadding=&quot;3&quot; style=&quot;border-collapse:collapse&quot;
|+ El Al Fleet
|- bgcolor=#6495ED
!Aircraft
!Total
!Passengers ; ;(First*/Business/Economy);
!Routes
!Notes
|-
|Boeing 737-700
|2
|104 (16/88)
|Domestic, Europe
|
|-
|Boeing 737-800
|6 ; (4 orders)
|142 (16/126)
|Domestic, Europe , Egypt
|Deliveries: 2008-2009
|-
|Boeing 747-400
|4 ; (1 order)
|408 (8/52/348)
|New York City, London, Paris, North America, Far East
|1 bought from Singapore Airlines ; Deliveries: November 2008
|-
|Boeing 757-200
|4
|178 (16/162)
|Domestic, Europe
|Replacement aircraft: Boeing 737-800
|- 
|Boeing 767-200ER
|2 
|198 (24/174)
|Europe, Far East, Miami
|
|- 
|Boeing 767-300
|4
|218 (32/186)
|Europe, Far East, North America 
|
|- 
|Boeing 767-300ER
|3
|234 (24/210)
|Europe, Far East, Toronto
|
|- 
|Boeing 777-200ER
|6
|283 (6/40/237)
|Far East, London, Los Angeles, New York City, Newark, Paris
|
|}
;*First Class offered on aircraft with a three-class seating configuration.;
;
In May 2007, it was announced that El Al reached an agreement to lease six or seven aircraft from Boeing between 2011 and 2015 after canceling its option to buy eight Boeing 787 aircraft. It is unclear what model these aircraft will be.;; Despite this, in July 2007, it was announced that the airline had re-entered negotiations to purchase two 787s.;; Boeing has attempted to resurrect the 787 deal.;;

Matmid
Matmid is El Al's frequent flyer program. It was launched in 2004 following the merger of El Al's previous frequent flyer programs. Matmid has four tiers: Matmid, Matmid Silver, Matmid Gold, and Matmid Platinum. Miles accumulated in the program entitle members to bonus tickets, flight upgrades, and discounts on car rentals, hotel stays, and other products and services. Points are also awarded for travel with partner airlines, as well as for nights at partner hotels and for credit card purchases.;;

= Partnerships=
Matmid points can be collected on most flights operated by:;;

*American Airlines and American Eagle
*South African Airways
*Sun D'Or
*Qantas

Some flights operated by the following airlines qualify for points:

*Aeroméxico flights from Madrid, Miami, New York, and Paris, to Mexico City

Points can also be collected on El Al's El Al#Codeshare agreements|codeshare flights.

King David Lounge
King David Lounge at Ben Gurion International Airport
The King David Lounge is El Al's airport lounge, serving the airline's premium class passengers. There are a total of five King David Lounges worldwide, located at Ben Gurion International Airport, Charles de Gaulle International Airport, John F. Kennedy International Airport, London Heathrow Airport, and Los Angeles International Airport.;;

All King David Lounges offer drinks, snacks, newspapers and magazines (Israeli and international). Some lounges offer free Wi-Fi internet access. The King David Lounge at Terminal 3 of Ben Gurion International Airport has a separate section for first-class passengers, telephones, shower facilities and a spa offering massages.;;

Codeshare agreements
As of May 2007, El Al has the following codeshare partners:;;



* Aerosvit Airlines
* Austrian Airlines
* Brussels Airlines
* Bulgaria Air
* Cyprus Airways
* Delta Air Lines

* Iberia Airlines
* Lot Polish Airlines
* South African Airways
* Swiss International Air Lines
* Tandem Aero
* Thai Airways International


It was announced in December 2007, that El Al would start a large code-sharing agreement with American Airlines in early 2008 following the cancellation of codeshare agreements between Delta and El Al following Delta's launch of non-stop service between New York (JFK) and Tel Aviv, competing directly with El Al.;;

Cargo

El Al has a cargo branch, El Al Cargo, which became independent in 1997. As the national cargo airline of Israel, it operates to destinations in Asia, Europe and North America. Before 2001, when the Israeli air cargo market opened up to competition, El Al Cargo enjoyed a monopoly.;

Cargo Fleet
;
{| class=&quot;toccolours sortable&quot; border=&quot;1&quot; cellpadding=&quot;3&quot; style=&quot;border-collapse:collapse&quot;
|+El Al Cargo Fleet
|- bgcolor=#6495ED
!Aircraft
!Total
!Capacity
!Routes
!Notes
|-
|Boeing 747#747-200|Boeing 747-200F
|4 
|Freighters
|Worldwide
|4X-AXF, 4X-AXK, 4X-AXL, 4X-AXM
|-
|}
;

Livery
El Al's historic, now superseded livery featured a turquoise/navy blue stripe down the side of aircraft, and a turquoise tailfin with the Israeli flag at the top. El Al's logo was featured above the front run of windows on each side of the plane in the turquoise/navy scheme.;; The new livery features a blue stripe with a thick silver border on the bottom that sweeps across the side of the aircraft near the wing, disappears over the top of the plane and reappears at the bottom of the tailfin. The El Al logo is part of the design, although it has been changed slightly since then.;;;
;
;
Image:ELAL 747-200 4X-AHQ EPWA 24 08 2004.jpg|El Al's superseded livery
Image:Elal.b767.arp.750pix.jpg|El Al's new livery
;
;

Incidents and accidents
*On 5 February 1950, one of El Al's DC-4s was damaged when it veered off the runway during takeoff in Tel Aviv. There were no casualties.;;

*On 24 November 1951, a DC-4 on a cargo flight from Tel Aviv to Amsterdam crashed on approach to Zürich Airport, killing 6 crew members.;;;

*On 27 July 1955, El Al Flight 402, a Lockheed Constellation, was shot down over Bulgaria after it strayed into Bulgarian airspace in rough weather. All 58 passengers and crew were killed.;;;;;
;

*In February 1970, an El Al plane was attacked at Munich Airport.The attackers, who had killed one and injured eight of those on board, were caught but released.;

*Another terrorist attack was foiled on 18 April 1986 in what became known as the Hindawi Affair. A pregnant Irishwoman named Anne Mary Murphy was about to board an El Al flight at London's Heathrow Airport when her bag was found to contain three pounds of plastic explosives. The explosives had been planted by her fiancé Nezar Hindawi who was booked on a different flight. Hindawi was jailed for 45 years, the longest sentence ever delivered by a British court.;; There was evidence that Syrian officials were involved and as a result, Britain cut off diplomatic relations with Syria.;;

*On 27 December 1985, after several attempts at direct attacks on El Al aircraft had failed, guerrillas of the Fatah Revolutionary Council attacked El Al counters at Rome and Vienna airports, killing 19 people.;;

*On 4 October 1992, El Al Flight 1862, a Boeing 747-200F cargo plane, crashed into the Groeneveen and Klein-Kluitberg flats in Bijlmermeer, a neighborhood of Amsterdam. The three crew members, one passenger, and 39 people on the ground were killed.;;

*On 4 July 2002, Hesham Mohamed Hadayet shot six Israelis at El Al's ticket counter at Los Angeles International Airport before he was shot and killed by an El Al security guard.;; Two of the victims died. Although not linked to any terrorist group, Hadayet, an Egyptian, espoused anti-Israeli views and was opposed to US policy in the Middle East.;; The US Federal Bureau of Investigation classified the shooting as a terrorist act, one of the few on US soil since the September 11, 2001 attacks.

*On 17 November, 2002, Tawfiq Fukra, a twenty-three-year-old Israeli Arab, attempted to hijack an El Al flight from Tel Aviv to Turkey. He was reportedly armed with a pocket knife and attempted to break into the cockpit in order to fly the aircraft back to Israel and crash it into a building, but was apprehended by on-board security personnel.;; Fukra has denied the charges.;;;;

*On 23 October 2003, an El Al Boeing 767 flying from Tel Aviv to Los Angeles via Toronto was diverted to Mirabel International Airport and then on to Hamilton/John C. Munro International Airport|Hamilton Airport, where Royal Canadian Mounted Police tactical teams were ready. The diversion was the result of a &quot;grave security threat&quot;, possibly a planned surface-to-air missile attack on the aircraft upon landing in Toronto.;;

*In 2006, the Swiss Attorney General reported that seven North Africans had been arrested in connection with a conspiracy to blow up an unspecified El Al flight in December 2005.;; At the time of the arrest, El Al's flights between Tel Aviv and London flew over the Geneva area where a ground-to-air missile had been discovered.;;

References


See also
*Sun D'Or International Airlines

External links
*[http://www.elal.co.il/ELAL/English/States/General/ El Al Israel Airlines] 
*[http://www.planespotters.net/Airline/El-Al-Israel-Airlines Fleet Detail]
*[http://www.airfleets.net/flottecie/El%20Al.htm Fleet Age]





Category:Airlines established in 1948
Category:El Al
Category:Airlines of Israel
Category:Companies listed on TASE

ar:إل عال
ca:El Al
de:El Al
el:El Al
es:El Al
fr:El Al
id:El Al
it:El Al
he:אל על
lad:El Al
ms:El Al
nl:El Al
ja:エル・アル航空
no:El Al
pl:El Al
pt:El Al
ro:El Al
ru:Эль-Аль
simple:El Al
sr:Ел Ал
fi:El Al
sv:El Al
tr:El Al
vi:El Al
yi:אל על
zh:以色列航空公司