

Colonel Lê Quang Tùng (1923 &amp;ndash; November 1, 1963) was the commander of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam Special Forces under the command of Ngô Ðình Nhu, the brother of South Vietnam's president, Ngô Đình Diệm. A former servant of the Ngô family, Tùng's military background was in security and counterespionage. During the 1950s, Tùng was a high ranking official in Nhu's Cần Lao Party, the secret Roman Catholic party which maintained the Ngô family's grip on power, extorting money from wealthy businessmen. He was promoted in 1960 directly to the rank of colonel, and appointed as the commander of the Special Forces. Tùng's period in command was noted mostly for his work in repressing dissidents, rather than fighting the Việt Cộng insurgents. His most well known attack was the raid on Xa Loi Pagoda on August 21, 1963 during the Buddhist crisis, in which hundreds of monks were believed to have died. Tùng's main military program was a scheme in which ARVN personnel attempted to infiltrate North Vietnam to engage in intelligence gathering and sabotage. The program was ineffective, with the vast majority of infiltrators being killed or captured. He was assassinated during the November 1963 coup that toppled Diệm's government. 

Early career
A devout Roman Catholic from Provinces_of_Vietnam#Regions|central Vietnam, Tùng was born in 1923 in what was then Annam in French Indochina. Short and bespectacled, Tùng was a former servant in the Ngô family. Serving a family dictatorship concerned purely with unadulterated power, his military background was almost entirely in security and counterespionage, an unusual training for leading the special forces. Tùng had first served the French as a security officer in central Vietnam before working for Diệm in the military-security section in central Vietnam. Tùng was a high ranking official in Nhu's Cần Lao Party, the secret Roman Catholic party which maintained the Ngô family's grip on power. Tùng was known among colleagues primarily for his unstinting loyalty and was hated by generals such as Nguyễn Khánh and Tôn Thất Đính.;Jones, p. 301.; His first job under Diệm was as a lieutenant in the intelligence section, where he extorted money from wealthy businessmen for the Cần Lao Party. In 1960, he was promoted straight to the rank of colonel and put in charge of the Special Forces.;; The CIA rated Tùng the third most powerful man in South Vietnam behind Diệm and Nhu, making him South Vietnam's most powerful military officer.;Prochnau, p. 368.;

Head of Special Forces
Nhu (r), shaking hands with then U.S. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1961|right|170px|thumb

Tùng had been trained by the Central Intelligence Agency in the United States. A Diệm loyalist, he lead a force of 1,840 men,;; which operated under Nhu's direction. He did not conduct operations against the communist Việt Cộng insurgents, but instead used his forces mainly in Saigon for repressing dissidents against the Diệm regime. Tùng's most notable attacks occurred during the Buddhist crisis of 1963. During this period, the Buddhist majority engaged in mass protests against the pro-Catholic policies of the Diệm regime. His special forces, under Nhu's orders, were responsible for the raid on August 21, 1963, of the Xa Loi Pagoda, causing a death toll estimated to be in the hundreds. A further 1,400 monks and nuns were arrested, as well as extensive property damage. The attacks occurred after Nhu had tricked a group of ARVN generals into agreeing to declare martial law. Nhu knew that the generals were plotting and hoped to exploit martial law to overthrow his brother, but outmaneuvred them by using the opportunity to send Tùng's Special Forces into the pagodas disguised as regular ARVN soldiers. As a result, South Vietnam's Buddhist majority initially thought that the regular army had attacked the monks, damaging their credibility among the populace as potential leaders of the country.;Karnow, pp. 306&amp;ndash;324.;;; Following the attacks, US officials threatened to withhold aid to the Special Forces unless they were used in fighting communists, rather than attacking dissidents.;;;

Another notable religious attack was perpetrated by Tùng's men in 1963. In a small pond near the central city of Đà Nẵng
, a hugely oversized carp was found swimming. Local Buddhists began to believe that the fish was a reincarnation of one of Gautama Buddha’s disciples. As pilgrimages to the pond grew larger and more frequent, so did disquiet among the district chief and his officials, who answered to Ngô Đình Cẩn, younger brother of Diệm. The pond was mined, but the fish swam on unhindered. After raking the pond with machine gun fire, the fish still lived. To deal with the problem, Tùng's forces were called in. The pond was grenaded, killing the carp. The incident generated more publicity as newspapers across the world ran stories about the miraculous fish. South Vietnamese army helicopters began landing at the site, with ARVN paratroopers filling their bottles with water which they believed had magical powers.;Prochnau, p. 411.;

Tùng also headed a group run by the CIA, in which ARVN personnel of northern origin were sent into North Vietnam posing as locals, in order to gather intelligence as well as sabotaging communist infrastructure and communications. They were trained in bases at Nha Trang, Đà Nẵng and sometimes offshore in Taiwan, Guam and Okinawa. Of the eighty groups of operatives, numbering six or seven per group, that were deployed in 1963 via parachute drops or night time sampan journeys, nearly all were captured or killed. Those who were captured were often used for propaganda by communist broadcasting authorities. Tùng was heavily criticised for his management of the operations.;Karnow, p. 378.;;

He was reported to have been planning an operation at the request of Nhu to stage a government organised student demonstration outside the US Embassy. In this plan, Tùng's men would assassinate ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., other key officials and the Buddhist leader, Thich Tri Quang, who had been given asylum there after being targeted in the pagoda raids. The plan reportedly would have seen Tùng's men burn down the embassy.;Jones, p. 393.;

Coup and assassination

In September, when Diệm and Nhu knew of a concrete plan by a group of generals were planning a coup, Nhu ordered Tùng and Tôn Thất Đính, another loyalist general who commanded the Saigon region, to plan a fake &quot;coup&quot; against the government by loyalist soldiers disguised as insurgents. This was to be followed by a fake &quot;counter-coup&quot;, whereupon Tùng's Special Forces, having left Saigon on the pretext of fighting communists, as well as Đính's forces would triumphantly re-enter Saigon to reaffirm the Diệm regime.;;

The body of Diệm in the back of the APC, having been executed on the way to military headquarters.|thumb|left|150px
Nhu and Tùng were unaware that Đính was part of the coup, and agreed to send his four Special Forces companies north out of Saigon on October 29. On November 1, Tùng was summoned to the military headquarters at Tan Son Nhut Air Base by the organisers of the coup, on the pretext of a routine officer's meeting. At 13:30, General Tran Van Don announced that a coup was taking place. All but Tùng rose to applaud, who was taken away by Nguyễn Văn Nhung, the bodyguard of General Dương Văn Minh, another of the coup plotters. As he was lead away, he shouted &quot;Remember who gave you your stars!&quot;.;;

At 16:45, Tùng was forced at gunpoint to tell his men to surrender and tell Diệm that he and his men had been captured. At nightfall he was taken with his brother, hands tied, into a jeep and driven to edge of the airport. They were made to kneel over two freshly dug holes, shot into them and buried.;Jones, p. 414.; The coup turned out to be successful, and on the following morning, Diệm and Nhu were captured and executed.;;
;;
Notes


References
*
*
*
Category:1923 births
Category:1963 deaths
Category:Vietnamese Roman Catholics
Category:Vietnamese anti-communists
Category:Military personnel of the Vietnam War
Category:Assassinated military personnel
Category:Deaths by firearm in Vietnam
vi:Lê Quang Tùng