French fries on a plate.

French fries (North America; sometimes also uncapitalized as &quot;french fries&quot;[http://www.m-w.com/cgi-bin/dictionary?sourceid=Mozilla-search&amp;va=french+fries] or simply &quot;fries&quot;[http://www.bartleby.com/61/68/F0346800.html]), or chips (United Kingdom, Republic of Ireland, and most Commonwealth nations), are pieces of potato that have been Julienned and deep-frying|deep-fried.

In areas like Tokyo where &quot;chips&quot; is the common term, &quot;French fries&quot; usually refers to the thinner variant found in US-influenced fast food restaurants, or to the even thinner &quot;shoestring potatoes&quot;. In North America &quot;chips&quot; generally means potato chips (called &quot;crisps&quot; in the UK and Ireland), which are deep-fried very thin slices of potato that are usually served at room temperature. In Australia &quot;chips&quot; refers to any form of fried potato. A more recent hybrid of thicker cross-cut splicings, and generally eaten hot, is &quot;waffle-cut potatoes&quot; (not to be confused with potato waffles made from reconstituted potato).

History
French fried potatoes were likely invented during the 18th century in the area that later became Belgium. The name &quot;French&quot; was applied to them in English at the beginning of the 19th century. 

=Culinary origin of the term=
The straightforward explanation of the term is that it means potatoes fried in the French sense of the verb &quot;to fry&quot; , which can mean either sautéing or Deep-frying|deep-fat frying, while its French origin, ''frire'', unambiguously means deep-frying&amp;nbsp;: ''frites'' being its past participle used with a plural feminine substantive, as in ''pommes de terre frites'' (&quot;deep-fried potatoes&quot;).;
;;
;
Thomas Jefferson, famous for serving French dishes, wrote exactly the latter French expression.;;
;
In the early 20th century, the term &quot;French fried&quot; was being used for foods such as onion rings or chicken, apart from potatoes.;
;;
;

The verb &quot;to french&quot;, though not attested until after &quot;French fried potatoes&quot; had appeared, can refer to &quot;julienning&quot; of vegetables as is acknowledged by some dictionaries;[http://www.m-w.com/cgi-bin/dictionary?french &quot;french :] (...) Usage: often capitalized – 1 : to trim the meat from the end of the bone of (as a chop) – 2 : to cut (green beans) in thin lengthwise strips before cooking&quot; (Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 10th ed.); while others only refer to trimming the meat off the shanks of chops.;&quot;to French: to prepare, as a chop, by partially cutting the meat from the shank and leaving bare the bone so as to fit it for convenient handling&quot; (Oxford English Dictionary); In the UK &quot;French-trimmed&quot; lamb chops (particularly for serving as a 'rack of lamb') have the majority of the fat removed together with a small piece of fatty meat from between the ends of the chop bones, leaving mainly only the meat forming the &quot;eye&quot; of the chop attached.

=Belgium=
The Belgians claim that &quot;French&quot; fries are in fact Belgian, but definitive evidence for the origin has not been presented.Belgian historian Jo Gerard recounts that potatoes were already fried in 1680 in the Spanish Netherlands, in the area of &quot;the Meuse valley between Dinant and Liège, Belgium. The poor inhabitants of this region allegedly had the custom of accompanying their meals with small fried fish, but when the river was frozen and they were unable to fish, they cut potatoes lengthwise and fried them in oil to accompany their meals.&quot;; 
;;
;;
;

The Dutch concur with a Southern Netherlandish or Belgian origin when referring to ''Vlaamse frieten'' ('Flemish fries'). In 1857, the newspaper ''Courrier de Verviers'' devotes an article to Fritz (assumed pun with'' 'frites), a Belgian entrepreneur selling French fries at fairs, calling them &quot;''le roi des pommes de terre frites''&quot;. In 1862, a stall selling French fried potatoes (see French_fries#Belgium_2|''frietkot'') called &quot;''Max en Fritz''&quot; was established near Het Steen in Antwerp.;
;;

A Belgian legend claims that the term &quot;French&quot; was introduced when British or American soldiers arrived in Belgium during World War I, and consequently tasted Belgian fries. They supposedly called them &quot;French&quot;, as it was the official language of the Belgian Army at that time.; But the term &quot;French fried potatoes&quot; had been in use in America long before the Great War.

Whether or not Belgians invented them, &quot;frites&quot; &quot;quickly became the national snack and a substantial part of both national dishes — making the Belgians their largest consumers, and to Europe, their &quot;symbolic&quot; creators.

=France=
Many Americans attribute the dish to France — although in France they are often thought of as Belgian — and offer as evidence a notation by U.S. President Thomas Jefferson. ''&quot;Pommes de terre frites à cru, en petites tranches&quot;'' (&quot;Potatoes deep-fried while raw, in small cuttings&quot;) are noted in a manuscript in Thomas Jefferson's hand (circa 1801-1809) and the recipe almost certainly comes from his French chef, Honoré Julien.; It is worth noting, though, that France had recently annexed what is now Belgium, and would retain control over it until the Congress of Vienna of 1815 brought it under Dutch reign.;
;
In addition, from 1813;Ude, Louis. ''The French Cook''; on, recipes for what can be described as French fries, occur in popular American cookbooks. By the late 1850s, one of these mentions the term &quot;French fried potatoes.&quot;;
;

Recipes for fried potatoes (not clearly specified how) in French cookbooks date back at least to Menon's ''Les soupers de la cour'' (1755). It is true that eating potatoes was promoted in France by Antoine-Augustin Parmentier|Parmentier, but he did not mention fried potatoes in particular. And the name of the dish in languages other than English does not refer to France; in French, they are simply called'' &quot;pommes de terres frites&quot; ''or, more commonly, simply'' &quot;pommes frites&quot; ''or'' 'frites.

=Spain=
Some claim that the dish was invented in Spain, the first European country in which the potato appeared via the New World colonies, and assumes the first appearance to have been as an accompaniment to fish dishes in Galicia, from which it spread to the rest of the country and further to the Spanish Netherlands;, more than a century before Belgium was created there.

Professor Paul Ilegems, curator of the Friet-museum in Antwerp, Belgium, believes that Saint Teresa of Ávila fried the first chips, referring also to the tradition of frying in Mediterranean cuisine.;
 ;(Feb 252007 found archived as &quot;Nieuw boek van frietprofessor Paul Ilegems over frietkotcultuur&quot; 20051213.3133206672696574);;;

=United Kingdom=
The first chip fried in Britain was apparently on the site of Oldham's Tommyfield Market in 1860. In Scotland, chips were first sold in Dundee, &quot;...in the 1870s, that glory of British gastronomy – the chip – was first sold by Belgian immigrant Edward De Gernier in the city’s Greenmarket.&quot;;
;

=United States' world-wide influence=
Oven baked fries / chips
Although the thicker cut English style of chip was already a popular dish in most Commonwealth countries, the thin style of french fries has been popularized worldwide in part by United States-based fast-food chains like McDonald's and Burger King. This came about through the introduction of the frozen French fry invented by the J.R. Simplot Company in the early 1950s. Before the handshake deal between Ray Kroc of McDonald's and Jack Simplot of the J.R. Simplot Company, potatoes were hand-cut and peeled in the restaurants, but Simplot's frozen product reduced preparation time and aided the expansion of the McDonald's franchise. One of the few fast-food chains that still In-N-Out Burger menu items#French fries|prepares fresh potatoes on the premises is In-N-Out Burger. Others are Nathan's Famous, Five Guys, and Penn Station (restaurant)#Menu|Penn Station.; 
;

=Philippines=
On September 22, 2007, Benguet State University (BSU) announced that 4 potato varieties -- Igorota, Solibao, Ganza and a 4th one yet to be given an official tag -- possess more than 18% dry matter content required by fast-food chains to make crispy and sturdy French fries.;[http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/breakingnews/regions/view_article.php?article_id=90044 Inquirer.net, RP's new potato varieties good for French fries];

=Recent developments=
Frozen French fries most often have been pre-fried — it is not unheard of for these to be baked instead of fried — and are widely available in supermarkets.

By the start of the 21st century, frozen fries for home-cooking had become available, battered and breaded, and many U.S. fast-food and casual food chains had turned to dusting with kashi, dextrin and flavors coating for crispier fries with particular tastes. The food service sector is challenged to create time-saving &quot;fries&quot; that consumers find acceptable. Results with new batterings and breadings, followed by microwaving, remain sub-standard, though oven frying may deliver reasonable fries, be it different from the traditionally fried item.;
;
;;

Food associations
Thin Potato chips accompanying a meal

Besides being a popular snack in themselves, French fried potatoes as a side dish to specific food or an integral part of a named dish often typify a country:
*In Belgium, steamed mussels: ''mosselen-friet'' or ''moules-frites''. After missing the popular dish for a few months, in summer, the Belgians rush to restaurants and fishmongers when the mussels arrive, typically from Zeeland. Another national dish is their ''biefstuk-friet'' in Dutch or ''bifteck-frites'' in French, which may disregard these terms' English language origin as beefsteak and — for aficionados — be horse steak; the steak fries are plainly seasoned or served with one of the sauces the Belgians are praised for, and usually a simple salad, in restaurants or at home. A time and cost efficient traditional puts a ''deep'' fried egg on top of a plate of chips.
*In France, grilled steak: ''steak-frites''.
*In Spain, fried eggs: ''huevos con patatas''.
*In the United Kingdom, fried fish: ''fish and chips'' and fried eggs: &quot;double egg and chips&quot;.
*In the United States, hamburgers.
*In Germany, curried sausage: ''Currywurst''.
*In Norway, Finland and Sweden, kebab, hamburgers and sausages.

Variants
Cutting fries at an In-N-Out Burger
French fries have numerous variants, from &quot;thick-cut&quot; to &quot;shoestring&quot;, &quot;joe joes&quot;, &quot;crinkle&quot;, &quot;curly&quot; and many other names. They can also be coated with breading and spices, which include garlic powder, onion powder, black pepper, paprika and salt to create &quot;seasoned fries&quot;, or cut thickly with the skin left on to create potato wedges, or without the skin to create &quot;steak fries&quot;, essentially the American equivalent of the British &quot;chip&quot;. Sometimes, French fries are cooked in the oven as a final step in the preparation (having been coated with oil during preparation at the factory): these are often sold frozen and are called &quot;oven fries&quot; or &quot;oven chips&quot;.

In France, the thick-cut fries are called'' 'pommes Pont-Neuf';Evelyn Saint-Ange, Paul Aratow (translator), ''La Bonne Cuisine de Madame E. Saint-Ange: The Essential Companion for Authentic French Cooking'', Larousse, 1927, translation Ten Speed Press, 2005, ISBN 1-580-08605-5, p. 553.; ''or simply'' 'pommes frites, about 10&amp;nbsp;mm; thinner variants are'' 'pommes allumettes' ''(matchstick potatoes), ±7&amp;nbsp;mm, and'' 'pommes pailles' ''(potato straws), 3-4&amp;nbsp;mm (roughly ⅜, ¼ and ⅛&amp;nbsp;inch respectively). The two-bath technique is standard (Bocuse).'' 'Pommes gaufrettes' ''or&quot;waffle-cut potatoes&quot; are not typical French fried potatoes, but actually crisps obtained by quarter turning the potato before each next slide over a grater and deep-frying just once.;
;

A Belgian chef patented ''&quot;steppegras&quot;'' ('prairie grass'), his variety of extremely thin-cut French fried potatoes developed in 1968 while working in Germany. The name refers to a dish including its particular sauce, and to his restaurant.;
;

In the British Isles, Australia and elsewhere, the term &quot;French fries&quot; is only used by fast-food restaurants serving narrow-cut (shoestring) fries. Traditional &quot;chips&quot; in the United Kingdom are usually cut much thicker, typically between ⅜ and ½ inches (9.5-13&amp;nbsp;mm) square in cross-section and cooked twice, making them less crunchy on the outside and fluffier on the inside. Since the surface-to-volume ratio is lower, they have a lower fat content. Chips are part of the popular British take-away dish fish and chips. In Australia, the UK, Ireland, and New Zealand, few towns are without a chip shop (colloquially, a ''chippie/chippy'').

Belgian fries are about 10-13&amp;nbsp;mm thick and must be fried twice, usually in horse fat, according to American culinary celebrity Alton Brown. This was used shortly after World War II but also quickly abandoned in favor of the traditional ox or beef fat. For economical reasons vegetable oil became common and is now usually preferred for a relative cholesterol benefit.

Cooking
French fries cooking
French fries draining after cooking
Fries prepared at a restaurant with thermostat temperature control. (The lack of bubbles in oil indicates an oil temperature of less than 120 °C)

Some home cooks who prepare French fries from scratch cook them a single time in a generous amount of oil pre-heated to a temperature around 375&amp;nbsp;°F (190&amp;nbsp;°C, medium to high heat power dial settings depending on the amount of fries to available fryer heat power) until they are golden and slightly crisp. The method recommended by most cookbooks, and used by many restaurants, especially those reputed to have excellent French fries, cook them in two stages: first at a thermostat temperature at around 350&amp;nbsp;°F (177&amp;nbsp;°C), until the fries are nearly cooked but limp, still pale and not too dried; then, after they have been removed from the oil and allowed to cool, at a higher temperature, generally around 375&amp;nbsp;°F (190&amp;nbsp;°C), fries are fried again until they are golden and crisp, which normally takes less than a minute. A third method, attributed to the celebrated French chef Joël Robuchon for the home cook, is to put the sliced potatoes into a saucepan with just enough cold oil in it to cover the potatoes, then cook them over high heat until golden, stirring occasionally.;
;
This chef mainly uses a more traditional style after blanching (boiling, but not over cooking in water) the cut potatoes in boiling water.;
;

;
The Belgian way of cooking'' 'frites' ''is generally in two stages.
:First the peeled and lengthwise crisscross cut potatoes are 'pre-fried' ('voorgebakken' in Dutch) for about 7 to 12 minutes in oil or – traditionally – beef dripping preheated to about 130 to 160 °C (medium-low heat power dial settings depending on the amount of fries to oil), to cook the inner part without burning the outside, while some of the moisture is driven out and where the fragrance starts to develop. When the fries are added to the oil, the oil at first cools quickly and is quickly kept at secret values (98 °C to 122 °C) to prevent the potatoes from burning. The fries stay a pale beige to yellow color and not too dry when finished at this stage. The fries would not be burned with brown patches at this stage. Then they are taken out, tossed to avoid clumping, and generally allowed to cool down and dry. This intermediate product can be either frozen for 'instant' deep-frying later, or as several batches of 'pre-fried' fries prepared (e.g., when fries stands are opened for the day, or at home ahead of a company of guests) for rapid frying and almost simultaneously serving later.
:The second stage where the cooked flavor is achieved involves frying for about two to five minutes in oil or beef fat preheated to 175 to 195 °C (as high as the oil or fat can safely stand, but without burning the fries before this time period: a too high temperature breaks it down to rather poisonous compounds) depending on the initial temperature of the fries. The (cool) batches must be small enough relative to the quantity of oil or fat for its preheated temperature to stay sufficiently high (125 °C to 160 °C) already during the first half minute of the frying process. Generally the cook is guided more by the color of the product than by timing; and by experience with the particular variety of potato. As a rule-of-the-thumb, one might wait until the fries start to float near the surface. The oil temperature must reach specific values (115 °C to 125 °C) for a specific amount of time after the fries has been precooked. The cooking task is to get sufficient cooking time (10 to 16 minutes) without allowing the fries to become too greasy. Once more the fries are sturdily tossed and preferably also kind of centrifuged (vigorously swerving the batch around in a wide recipient, in the shape of the base of a cone upside down, held in front of the cook's belly – common for professional batch frying), and shortly tossed again – thus removing excessive fattiness and preventing loss of the outer crispness.
:Ideally, the fries have a golden to golden-brown appearance and a bite through the crispy outside reveals a soft inside. For a given depth of the crispy crust, the balance with the soft cooked potato inside is determined by the thickness; no less than 13 mm traditionally to 10&amp;nbsp;mm towards the end of the 20th century, before frying, are typical for Belgium. Some restaurants may cut as thin as 5&amp;nbsp;mm. In a good professional ''friterie'' stand, the cut is done in a single action by driving the whole peeled potato standing vertically, through a horizontal ''raster'' of crosswise sharp blades. This easily removable (for cleaning) and exchangeable set of blades defines the thickness of the ''frites''.

Typically for U.S. fast-food restaurants, is a preparation prior to cooking:
:In an interview, Burger King president Donald Smith said that his chain's fries are sprayed with a sugar solution shortly before being packaged and shipped to individual outlets. The sugar carmelizes in the cooking fat, producing the golden color customers expect. Without it, the fries would be nearly the same color outside as inside: pasty yellow. Smith believes that McDonald's also sugar-coats its fries. McDonalds was assumed to fry their fries for a total time of about 16 to 20 minutes, and with fries fried at least twice. The secret oil temperature(s) was assumed to be such that the color of the fries would still be a pale beige before the final frying. The final frying time seems to be less than a few minutes at higher oil temperatures. The fries appear to contain beef lard, or shortening. ;
;

Accompaniments
Chili-cheese fries
French fries are almost always salted just after cooking. They are then served with a variety of condiments, notably tomato sauce, ketchup, curry, curry ketchup (mildly hot mix of the former), hot or chili sauce, mustard, mayonnaise, bearnaise sauce, tartar sauce, tzatziki, feta cheese, garlic sauce, fry sauce, ranch dressing, barbecue sauce, gravy, brown sauce, vinegar (especially malt vinegar), lemon, piccalilli, pickled cucumber, gherkins, very small pickled onions, or honey.;
;;
;

=Australia=
Chips are usually eaten with tomato sauce (ketchup) and most shops offer a choice of plain or chicken salt (seasoned salt). Many shops also offer gravy.Potato wedges are also popular which consist of a quartered, often with the skin left on, seasoned fried potato. Potato wedges are commonly eaten with sweet chilli sauce and sour cream, but also with tomato sauce.

=Belgium=
A typical ''frietkot'' in Brussels streets.
Even the smallest Belgian town has a ''frietkot'' (literally 'fries shack').;Whether Herstappe's eighty-odd inhabitants have a 'frietkot'? Belgium's ''smallest'' municipality Saint-Josse-ten-Noode has at least one.
;*The figure of speech is obviously not exaggerated:;*
 (See heading 'Fritkot');*
; This Dutch language term also became adopted by the French speaking part of the country in addition to the French ''friterie''; an equivalent though slightly less colloquial Dutch form for such vending stall is ''frietkraam'', while a ''frituur'' —from French ''friture''— can as well be in a proper shop possibly furnished with tables. Traditionally, take-away chips were picked by the fingers out of a tip bag wrapped from a square paper, while walking on the streets. By the 1970s and 80s with several meat accompaniments gaining popularity, more practical open carton boxes became standard and tiny plastic forks available. One can order a small or large portion, often three or four sizes are priced.;''Fries with mayonnaise'' is a fastfood classic in Belgium, often eaten without any side orders. The limited choice around 1960 between a pickled herring, a cold large meatball ''boulet'' or red coloured garlic sausage ''cervela'' (both often served deep-fried later on), or a beef or (now rarely) horsemeat stew, became expanded by ''stoofvlees'' or ''stoofkarbonade'' and a wide variety of deep-fried meats as chicken legs, beef or pork sticks, minced beef and/or pork and/or chicken and/or turkey in all shapes (balls, sticks, sausages) mixed with a dosage of fat and condiments to one's preference, usually factory made. An example of an additional on-the-spot preparation is sometimes in Flanders called ''mammoet speciaal'' (mammoth special), a large ''frikandel'' (''curryworst'' in the Antwerp and Flemish Brabant) deep-fried and cut so as to put chopped onion in the V-shaped length and dressed with mayonnaise (as real as factory made can be, not ''frietsaus'') and (curry-)ketchup. The earlier of now many available sauces, are mayonnaise, and one called ''pickles'' which is actually piccalilly.;
 (publication date showing a sauce, outside Belgium rarely used with fries, to have been typical before far more kinds became available);; Though Belgians do not sprinkle vinegar on fries, they may eat them with cold mussels out of theshells preserved in vinegar, entirely uncomparable to the national dish with freshly boiled hot mussels served in the shells.

=Bulgaria=
In Bulgaria, a serving of fries can be ordered with a covering of sirene, a grated white brine cheese.

=Canada=
Poutine is a mixture of fries, cheese curd and hot chicken sauce.
Throughout Canada, white vinegar is a popular condiment for French fries. No other country is known to so enjoy white vinegar (as opposed to malt or other vinegars) on its fries. Most major Canadian fast-food outlets provide white vinegar packets next to their ketchup packets in their stores, and many restaurants keep white vinegar on their tables. That is not to say that the use of malt vinegar is not common – particularly amongst those of English heritage. In most traditional 'fish &amp; chips' shops in Canada, malt vinegar is more prevalent. However, ketchup remains the most popular condiment used on French fries in Canada.

In Canada, French fries are the main component of a dish called'' 'poutine: a mixture of French fries with fresh cheese curds, covered with a hot gravy, optionally with browned ground beef and/or a vegetable such as green peas mixed in. This dish is most popular in Quebec fast food chains such as La Belle Province, and Lafleur Restaurants; however, its popularity has begun to spread in Quebec, and then across Canada, and is also carried in national chains such as Harvey's[http://www.harveys.ca/eng/nutritional_info/Harveys_NAG_V2.pdf] and New York Fries[http://www.southstburger.com/pdf/SOUTH_ST-launch_release4.pdf], as well as Canadian outlets of international franchises such as A&amp;W[http://www.aw.ca/foodfacts.nsf/listbyref_new/Sides-6] and Burger King[http://www.burgerking.ca/en/1158/index.php]. (A similar variant, 'disco fries' is found in several New England cities.) In Newfoundland, &quot;chips, dressing and gravy&quot; (sometimes referred to by outsiders as &quot;Newfie fries&quot;) comprise French fries topped with &quot;dressing&quot; (turkey stuffing made with summer savoury) and gravy.

another variation consits of topping the french fires with a selection of toppings including ground beef, weiners, dressing and cheese and topped with gravy. this is known as &quot;mess&quot;

=Denmark=
In Denmark the traditional accompaniment to French fries is remoulade sauce.

=Germany=
In Germany, accompaniments are usually limited to ketchup and mayonnaise.The two are often combined, which is commonly called ''Pommes rot-weiß'' (&quot;fries red and white&quot;). Although mustard may also be available at the same fast food stand to serve with Bratwurst, it is used to accompany French Fries less commonly.Curry sauce is sometimes used as a condiment.During Gerhard Schröder's term, some Germans jokingly referred to a combination of salted French fries (&quot;Pommes&quot;, or &quot;Fritten&quot;) with ketchup and a large Currywurst as ''Kanzlerplatte'' (Chancellor's Dish) because Schröder was said to prefer this kind of fast food. Other &quot;nicknames&quot; are &quot;Bottroper Platte&quot; (Bottrop plate), referring to the city of Bottrop in the Ruhr area or &quot;Pommes Schranke&quot; (Fries &quot;barrier&quot;), referring to the common red and white markings on barriers.

=Netherlands=
Dutch fries with tartar sauce, served in a cone.
In the Netherlands, vending points are often very similar to the ones in Belgium but called ''snackbars'', except for the one on the Langedijk in Gorinchem which is called a ''frieterij''. Though each country has a few typical accompaniments, many are alike but usually known by different and confusing names in an otherwise for the Netherlands and Flanders common language. Peanut sauce is also popular (also called satay sauce, after the Malayan meat ''sate'' on which the same sauce is used). The Dutch also use the word mayonnaise to refer to ''frietsaus'' (fries-sauce) a thicker, less acidic sauce made specially to accompany French fries (as made famous in the film ''Pulp Fiction''). Another interesting combination is ''Patatje Oorlog'' (Dutch for: ''French Fries War''), which is French fries with a variety of sauces, a variety that differs from region to region, and even from one snackbar to another. While it sometimes means mayonnaise (or rather, ''frietsaus''), peanut sauce and chopped raw onions, in other places it means the fries are accompanied with all condiments available. Dutch snackbars typically offer at least 8 condiments or combinations of them (the condiments are never free in the Netherlands), but some serve up to 40 different styles. The Dutch eat their fries mostly with the famous Dutch snacks such as the kroket and frikandel. A well made fries recipe would give the fries a fried fish and pastry like fragrance. The texture of this fries indicates that it may have first been blanched before frying.

=Philippines=
In the Philippines, they are often served with a sprinkling of powdered flavors, primarily cheese, sour cream or barbecue. In some fast food chains, these are topped with cheese sauce and minced bacon.

=United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland=
Fish &amp; chips.

In the United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland, traditionally chips are usually accompanied by salt and malt vinegar, and in some areas onion vinegar. The fondness for vinegar on chips has led to some outlets using spray misters, such as used for misting plants or spraying cleaning products, for the even distribution of vinegar to chips; this ensures an even coating of vinegar, meaning there are no &quot;pools&quot; where vinegar and salt form a small clump. In England and Wales, gravy and curry sauce are available from some chip shops. In Northern England, Scotland and South Wales, 'chips, cheese and gravy' is a popular dish, while in the South 'cheesy chips' (chips with grated cheddar thickly sprinkled on) are popular. In Britain and Ireland, the term ''french fries'' refers exclusively to the long thin version served in fast food establishments. The most common accompaniment for chips in England is tomato ketchup; other sauces used include barbecue sauce, burger sauce, mayonnaise, mustard and brown sauce or a combination thereof. When chips are served with other fried foods such as fish or battered sausage, mushy peas or baked beans are a popular addition. In the Midlands and some Northern regions of England a takeaway of chips with either mushy peas or baked beans is called a &quot;pea mix&quot; or &quot;bean mix&quot; respectively.

In Scotland salt and vinegar tends to be served in most places, with salt and sauce (a mixture of brown sauce and vinegar) a local specialty served in Edinburgh and parts of Fife. Often the 'vinegar' is actually non-brewed condiment, a solution of acetic acid coloured with caramel. Fish and chips in parts of Scotland is more commonly called &quot;a fish supper&quot;.

In Ireland, chips are served with salt and vinegar, with gravy, mayonnaise, pepper sauce, curry sauce and mushy peas being common accompaniments. Fish and chips or kebab are common. Chips are also commonly served with any combination of coleslaw, curry sauce, garlic sauce andgrated cheese which is known as a &quot;garlic and cheese chip&quot;. &quot;Burger sauce&quot; is also very a popular accompaniment.

=United States=
In the United States, by far the most popular condiment for fries is ketchup, so much so that consumption of restaurant fries drives ketchup sales.;[http://www.ers.usda.gov/AmberWaves/September03/Findings/VegetableConsumption.htm Vegetable Consumption Away from Home on the Rise]; Occasionally mustard is used, and malt vinegar mainly available at restaurants which serve fish and chips. Fries are sometimes coated with melted cheese, called ''cheese fries''. This can be in combination with chili, making chili cheese fries.
*Variations of cheese fries include fries covered with Cheez Whiz, mozzarella, Swiss cheese, or garlic and cheese fries (cheese with garlic mayonnaise).
*Disco fries – (with brown gravy and mozzarella) are a staple of New Jersey diners.
*The American fast-food restaurant Checkers Drive-In|Checkers/Rally's serve &quot;fully loaded fries&quot;: seasoned fries covered in melted American cheese, ranch dressing and bacon bits. 
*Mid-Atlantic States often put Old Bay Seasoning on fries. These are sometimes referred to as &quot;beach fries&quot;.;
;
*In Rhode Island, both vinegar and ketchup are standards on the table in local restaurants.
*In Utah and surrounding areas, French fries are often served with fry sauce, a mixture of spices, mayonnaise, and ketchup.
*In some parts of California and Arizona, french fries are covered with cheese, carne asada, sour cream, and guacamole. These are called carne asada fries and are served almost exclusively in taco shops.
*In the Midsouth, fries are often served with white, or gravy#Types of gravy|country gravy.
* In Northern Virginia, eating french fries dipped in chocolate has recently become popular and are called &quot;choco-fries&quot;.

''Steak fries'' are thicker-cut fries, often with the skins intact.They are often coated with spices or marinaded before cooking.They may be fried or baked in the oven.;[http://www.foodnetwork.com/food/recipes/recipe/0,1977,FOOD_9936_22048,00.html Oven Steak Fries];

=Vietnam=
In Vietnam, restaurants are usually found serving fries with sugar over a dollop of soft butter.

Health aspects

French fries can contain a large amount of fat (usually saturated) or oils from frying. Some researchers have suggested that the high temperatures used for frying such dishes may have results harmful to health (see acrylamides). In the United States about ¼ of vegetables consumed are prepared as French fries and are proposed to contribute to widespread obesity. ; Frying French fries in beef tallow, recently discarded from the McDonald's recipe, adds saturated fat to the diet. Replacing tallow with tropical oils such as palm oil simply substitutes one saturated fat for another. Replacing tallow with partially hydrogenated oil reduces cholesterol but adds trans fat, which has been shown to both raise LDL cholesterol and lower HDL cholesterol.; 
;;
;;
;
Many restaurants now advertise their use of unsaturated oils. Five Guys, for example, advertises their fries are prepared in peanut oil.;[http://www.fiveguys.com Five Guys];

Legal issues
In 1994, the well-known owner of Stringfellows nightclub in London, Peter Stringfellow, took exception to McCain Foods' use of the name &quot;Stringfellows&quot; for a brand of long thin French fries and took them to court. He lost the case (''Stringfellows v McCain Food (GB) Ltd (1994)'') on the basis that there was no connection in the public mind between the two uses of the name, and therefore McCain's product would not have caused the nightclub to lose any sales.;
;;
;

In June 2004, the United States Department of Agriculture, with the advisement of a federal district judge from Beaumont, Texas, classified batter-coated French fries as a vegetable under the Perishable Agricultural Commodities Act. Although this move was mostly for trade reasons (French fries do not meet the standard to be listed as a &quot;processed food&quot;), this received significant media attention partially due to the documentary ''Super Size Me''.

See also
*Deep-frying
*Chip pan
*Deep fryer
*Vacuum fryer
*Home fries
*Freedom fries

Notes


References
* Bocuse, Paul. ''La Cuisine du marché'', Paris, 1992.
* 




Category:American cuisine
Category:Belgian cuisine
Category:British cuisine
Category:Fast food
Category:Potato dishes

ca:Patates fregides
cs:Hranolky
da:Pommes frites
de:Pommes frites
es:Papas fritas
eo:Terpomfingroj
fr:Frite
id:Kentang goreng
it:Patate fritte
ko:감자 튀김
he:טוגנים
lb:Fritten
li:Friete
nl:Friet
ja:フライドポテト
no:Pommes frites
nn:Pommes frites
pl:Frytki
pt:Batata frita
ksh:Fritten
ru:Картофель фри
simple:French fried potatoes
fi:Ranskalaiset perunat
sv:Pommes frites
vls:Frietn
zh:薯條