

''Omphalotus nidiformis'', or ghost fungus, is a gilled basidiomycete mushroom found in southern Australia most notable for its bioluminescent properties. Generally found growing on dead or dying trees, it is saprotroph and parasite. Its scientific name is derived from the Latin ''nidus'' &quot;nest&quot;, hence 'nest shaped'. Similar in appearance to the oyster mushroom, it was previously considered a member of the same genus, ''Pleurotus'',and described under the former names ''Pleurotus nidiformis'' or ''Pleurotuslampas''. However, it is poisonous and while not lethal, consuming this mushroom leads to severe cramps and vomiting. Poisonings have occurred over confusion with oyster mushrooms. It is one of several species with bioluminescent properties occurring worldwide, all of which are poisonous.

Taxonomy and naming
The ghost fungus was initially described in 1844 by English naturalist Miles Joseph Berkeley as ''Agaricus nidiformis'', before being later placed in the genus ''Pleurotus'' in 1887. It was finally placed in the genus ''Omphalotus'' with other bioluminescent mushrooms by Orson K. Miller, Jr. in 1994.;(1994) ''Mycol. helv.'' 6(2): 93 ; Material had been collected by James Drummond in 1841 from the Swan River and described by Berkeley as both this and ''Agaricus lampas''. The latter name (as ''Pleurotus lampas'') persisted in some texts but has been synonymised with this species. Its specific epithet is derived from the Latin terms ''nīdus'' 'nest' and ''forma'' 'shape' or 'form', hence 'nest shaped'.;; ''Lampas'' is derived from the Greek ''lampas''/λαμπας 'torch'.;;

Several species with similar bioluminescent properties occur worldwide, all of which are poisonous. The best known are the North American jack o'lantern mushroom (''Omphalotus olearius'') and the Tsukiyotake (''Omphalotus japonicus'' (Kawam.) Kirchm. &amp; O.K. Mill., aka ''Lampteromyces japonicus'' (Kawam.) Sing.) found in Japan and eastern Asia. A recent molecular study shows the ghost fungus to be most closely related to the western jack o'lantern mushroom, ''Omphalotus olivascens'', which is abundant in Southern and Central California.;Kirchmair M, Morandell S, Stolz D, Pöder R (2004) Phylogeny of the genus ''Omphalotus'' based on nuclear ribosomal DNA-sequences. ''Mycologia'' 96 1253-1260;

Description
The fruiting body of the ghost fungus can be found on dead or diseased wood, where it causes white heart rot.;; A saprobe or parasite, it is nonspecific in its needs and can be found on native ''Banksia'', ''Hakea'' or ''Acacia'' and various Myrtaceae as well as introduced trees such as ''Pinus'' or ''Platanus'' species.;;

The cap is very variable in colour, ranging from cream though often tinted with orange, brownish, greyish, purple or even bluish-black shades. Younger specimens are often darker. Growing up to 30 cm (15 in) in diameter it is funnel-shaped or fan-shaped in appearance with inrolled margins. The cream-white gills are decurrent and often drip with moisture. The stubby stem may be central to lateral in its attachment to the cap and is up to 8 cm (3 in) long and tapers to the base. The thin flesh is creamy white in colour. There is no distinctive smell or taste. The spore print is white.;

Its bioluminescence is best seen in low-light conditions when the eye develops night vision. The gills are the most luminescent part of the fungus, emitting a greenish light which fades with age. The light allegedly can be bright enough to read by.;

It may be confused with the brown oyster mushroom (''Pleurotus australis''), which is brown in colour and does not glow in the dark.;

Distribution and habitat
It occurs in south western Western Australia, where it was first recorded by Drummond,; and south eastern Australia, from eastern South Australia through to southeast Queensland. It also occurs in Tasmania.;; It can be found in eucalypt and pine forests,;; as well as in urban parks and gardens. Fruiting bodies can be numerous and occur in overlapping clusters on dead wood.;

Biochemistry
''Omphalotus nidiformis'' is not edible. Though reputedly mild tasting, eating it will result in vomiting.; Symptoms generally occur 30 minutes to two hours after consumption and last for several hours. There is no diarrhea and patients recover without lasting ill-effects.;; The toxic ingredient is thought to be a sesquiterpene compound known as illudin, which is also responsible for its bioluminescence.;;

References


External links
*[http://www.rbg.vic.gov.au/dbpages/fungi/factsheets2/highlight.php?id=35&amp;what=imc Fungimap fungus of the month ''Omphalotus nidiformis'']
Category:Basidiomycota
Category:Poisonous mushrooms
Category:Bioluminescent organisms
Category:Fungi native to Australia