
Rear Admiral Mark W. Balmert, USN, is the commander of the joint Navy and Marine Corps Expeditionary Strike Group 3.

U.S. Navy career
Balmert is a graduate of the University of Notre Dame, where he earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Chemical Engineering and was commissioned as an Ensign through the Navy Reserve Officer Training program. Balmert also earned a Master's Degree in Financial Management from the Naval Postgraduate School and completed his Joint Military Education at the Armed Forces Staff College. He also attended the National Securities Management Course at the Maxwell School of Citizenship at Syracuse University.

Rear Adm. Balmert has served at sea aboard the USS Lynde McCormick (DDG-8)|USS ''Lynde McCormick'' (DDG 8), USS Fife (DD-991)|USS ''Fife'' (DD 991), and the USS Merrill (DD-976)|USS ''Merrill'' (DD 976). He commanded USS Chandler (DDG-996)|USS ''Chandler'' (DDG 996) winning the Battle Efficiency Award, and Destroyer Squadron 7 during Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom as Sea Combat Commander for the Constellation Battle Group.

Ribbon cutting for ESG 3, RADM Balmert (left) and MajGen Carl B. Jensen|Carl Jensen, USMC (right), April 2007
Rear Adm. Balmert also served as Chief Staff Officer of Destroyer Squadron 13; Assistant Surface Operations Officer for Commander 7th Fleet; Flag Secretary for Commander 3rd Fleet; Operations Officer for Commander Cruiser-Destroyer Group 1; and his current assignment as Commander Expeditionary Strike Group 3.

Shore assignments include Naval Plans Officer at Headquarters, United Nations Command and Combined Forces Command in Seoul, Korea; Surface Commander Assignments Branch Head in Millington, Tenn.; Chief of Staff for Commander Naval Surface Force U.S. Pacific Fleet; Director, Operations Division, Office of Budget in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management/ Comptroller) and Director, Operations Division, Fiscal Management Division in the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations.

Decorations
Rear Adm. Balmert’s personal decorations include the Legion of Merit with four Gold Stars, the Bronze Star, the Defense Meritorious Service Medal, the Meritorious Service Medal with two Gold Stars, the Navy Commendation Medal with three Gold Stars, and the Joint Service Achievement Medal.

See also



References
:''This article incorporates text in the public domain from the United States Navy.
*

External links
*

*



Category:Living people
Category:Recipients of the Legion of Merit
Category:Recipients of the Bronze Star medal
Category:University of Notre Dame alumni
Category:United States Navy admirals