
Karben is a town in the Wetteraukreis, in Hesse, Germany. It is situated on the banks of the river Nidda in the Rhein-Main-Gebiet (Rhein-Main area), approx. 18 kilometres north of Frankfurt. 

Division of the town
Karben as a unified city was founded in 1970, comprising some smaller villages (Klein-Karben, Gross-Karben, Okarben, Kloppenheim, Rendel, Burg-Gräfenrode, and Petterweil).

Infrastructure
Karben has two railroad stations (Gross-Karben and Okarben) on Frankfurt's local transportation network (S-Bahn Line 6). It has access to the A661 autobahn and the highway B3. The town hall is located in a newer district of Gross-Karben, as is a public swimming pool. The industrial district east of Gross- and Klein-Karben hosts several companies of national and international stature.

History
The Karben area is rich in history. The village of Okarben was once location of a Roman military Castellum, forming a part of the Limes, the Roman imperial border defense network. 
Kloppenheim once belonged to an installation of the Teutonic Knights Order, who maintained a small palace there, which can still be visited. Gross Karben hosts two more manors which where inhabited by local landlords. The &quot;Degenfeldsche Schloss&quot; contains today a small museum on local history and a richly decorated chamber used for wedding ceremonies. The Leonhardi'sche Schloss was taken over by the newly created Freiherr von Leohardi family, who still inhabits the place. One more manor can be found in Burg-Gräfenrode (also known as Roggau) and was inhabited by an official for the Princes of Ysenburg und Büdingen who reigned most of the villages of Karben until the formation of the Deutsches Reich. Gross-Karben, Klein-Karben, Okarben, Burg-Gräfenrode and Rendel still have churches dating back from the Baroque period. Okarben experienced a face-change in the 19th century, when it started hosting workers for the newly established :de:Main-Weser-Bahn|Main-Weser Railroad between Frankfurt and Kassel. The city has transformed itself from a bundle of independent villages living mostly of farming the rich soils of the Wetterau to a slowly integrating city providing housing for a growing population of commuters and space for several small and mid-sized enterprises, while maintaining a lot of its original rural charme.

Twin towns
* 25px St. Egrève (France)
* 25px Ramonville St. Agne (France)
* 25px Luisenthal (Thuringia, Germany)
* 25px Krnov (Czech Republic)

External links
* [http://www.karben.de Official site] 



de:Karben
eo:Karben
fr:Karben
it:Karben
lmo:Karben
nl:Karben
ru:Карбен
vo:Karben