

Pandit Nathuram Premi was a writer, publisher, poet, editor, linguist and an intellectual giant in the field of Jainism as well as Hindi literature. A budding poet, he wrote under the nom de plume of &quot;Premi&quot;. Although belonging to the Digambara sect of Jainism, he adopted a non-sectarian attitude and published and translated many Digambara as well as Śvetāmbara works. Working as a clerk in a firm in Mumbai he rose to establish his own publishing house and bookstore[http://www.gohgk.com Hindi Granth Ratnākar Kāryālay] which published works of many of the biggest names in Indian literature, including Munshi Premchand, Hajariprasad Dvivedi, Jainendrakumar, Yashpal, Sharatchandra Chatterjee and Rabindranath Tagore. The bookshop and publishing house now called [http://www.hindibooks.8m.com Hindi Granth Karyalay]is now being managed by his grandson and great grandson nearly 100 years after its establishment.

Early life
Born on 26 November 1881 in Devari, in the district of Sagar in Bundelkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Nāthūrām Premī was the eldest child of Tundelal Modi, a travelling merchant of modest means, belonging to the Paravāra community of Digambara Jains hailing from Bundelkhand. He studied in grammar school and was the monitor of his class. He cleared his pre-high school exams in 1898 and became a schoolteacher nearby at Rehli. In the late 1890s, he married Rama Devi, who was from the nearby village of Sarkheda, in the district of Sagar.

Arrival in Mumbai



Career in Hindi and Jain Literature

Nāthūrām Premī excelled in the field of literature as a poet, editor, writer and publisher earning respect and affection of his contemporaries like Munshi Premchand, Mahaviraprasad Dvivedi, Rahul Sankrityayan, Pandit Sukhlalji, Muni Jinavijayaji, Ganeshprasadji Varni, Pandit Becharadasji Doshi, Pandit Agarchand Nahata and Dr Dalsukh Malvania.; Pandit Sukhlalji, Muni Jinavijayaji,, Pandit Becharadasji Doshi, Pandit Agarchand Nahata and Dr Dalsukh Malvania acknowledged their debt to Premiji in a festschrift dedicated to him Section l, &quot;Abhinandana&quot;, Premī Abhinandana Grantha, Pages 1- 62. ; Premiji and Munshi Premchand were close friends, and he published the first edition of Munshi Premchand's classic novel, ''Godān''. He also published Premchand's short story collections entitled Nava Nidhi and Sapta Saroj.
=A Budding Poet=
Under the inspiration ofhis guru Syed Amir Ali Mir, Nathuram became a budding poet, writing in Urdu and Braj under the nom de plume of &quot;Premi&quot;. Since then he was affectionately called Premiji by his friends and contemporaries. His poems were published in the literary magazines of the time, Rasika Mitra, Rasika Vātikā and Kāvya Sudhākara. 

=Editor and Writer=

 ran from 1912 to 1921, when it had to be closed down due to lack of funds.; he founded the ''Jain Hitaiṣī'', a Jain magazine with a reformist and questioning approach. Jain Hitaiṣī was known for the forthright views of its editorials and academically sound articles on Jain history, culture and society. His ''Jain Sāhitya aur Itihās'', is a collection of articles that he wrote for Jain Mitra and Jain Hitaiṣī, which set the benchmark for scholarly research into Jain history. ;He later re-edited these articles and produced a compilation, first published in 1942, and a second edition in 1956. His grandson Yashodhar's wife Vijayalakshmi helped him with the second edition.; 

He also edited classics such as the ''Banārasīvilāsa'', ''Daulatapadasangraha'', ''Jinaśataka'' and ''Ardha Kathānaka''. Premiji also edited and published ''Ardha Kathānaka'', ''Banārasīvilāsa'' and many other Digambara Jain works, including Ācārya Kundakunda's ''Bārasa Anuvekkhā'' and Ācārya Amrtacandra's ''Puruṣāthadiddhyupāya''. He also edited and published for the first time, the Śvetāmbara classic ''Upamitibhavaprañcakathā.''}}

=Establishment of Hindi Grantha Ratnākara Kāryālaya=

On 24 September 1912, Premiji founded the publishing house ''Hindi Grantha Ratnākara Kāryālaya'' (now known as ''Hindi Granth Karyalay''), which was to become the foremost Hindi publishing house in India and is also the oldest bookstore in Mumbai. The first publication was a Hindi translation of John Stuart Mill's ''Liberty'', titled ''Svādhīnatā''by Pandit Mahavir Prasad Dvivedi. He published almost the entire oeuvre of Sharatchandra Chattopadhyaya, the great Bengali writer and some works of Rabindranath Tagore, such as ''Ānkh kī Kirkirī'', and ''Naukā Dūbī''. Premiji also published Hindi translations of the Gujarati writer KM Munshi, such as ''Gujarāt ke Nāth'' and ''Pātan kā Prabhutva''. Other famous woks published include Munshi Premchand's classic novel, ''Godān'' and short story collections titled ''Nava Nidhi'' and ''Sapta Saroj''. He also published works of new writers such as Hajariprasad Dvivedi, Jainendrakumar, Yashpal, Acharya Chatursen, and Pandit Sudarshan. He also published the Bengali plays of Dvijendra Lal Rai for the first time in Hindi.

In memory of Seth Manikchandra, Premiji established the ''Manikacandra Jaina Granthamālā'' wherein he published Jain scriptures, for the first time systematically edited by philologists. The ''Manikacandra Jaina Granthamālā'' published over 48 Digambara Jain texts, mostly written in Prakrit, Apabhramśa or Sanskrit. He ran the Manikacandra Jaina Granthamālā on an honorary basis between 1915 and the 1950s selling all the books at cost price. When his health began to fail, it was decided to hand over the series to ''Bhāratīya Jñānapītha'' in Varanasi.; Unfortunately after that, the series came to a halt and none of its books are available today.;

=Contribution to other Indian Languages=


=Social Reformer=



Premiji’s Legacy

Under his tutelage, Hindi Grantha Ratnākara Kāryālaya became India's No. 1 publishers of Hindi literature. In recognition of his contributions to Indian literature, the acclaimed Hindi novelist Vishnu Prabhakar called Premiji the ''&quot;Bhīsma Pitāmaha&quot;'' of Hindi publishing. 

Premiji had suffered from asthma for a long time and passed away owing to old age on 30 January 1960. He left behind his daughter-in-law and two grandsons. His elder grandson, Yashodhar Modi, is continuing his legacy along with his son, Manish Modi. 

In Premiji's memory, his grandson Yashodhar Modi has started the Pandit Nathuram Premi Research Series. This series has published select volumes focusing on subjects as varied as Jainism, philosophy and yoga and published original texts by ancient and medieval Jain ascetics such as Kundakunda, Samantabhadra, Pūjyapāda, Joindu, Prabhācandra, Vādirāja, Bhāvadeva and many others, usually accompanied by a crisp translation in either Hindi or English. 

Also, highly respected modern scholars such as Premiji himself, Ludwig Alsdorf, Maurice Bloomfield, Willem Bollée and Jaykumar Jalaj have been and are being published in the Pandit Nathuram Premi Research Series.

Biblography

#Aggarwal, Vasudev Sharan (Ed.). ''Premī Abhinandana Grantha''. Tikamgarh: Premī Abhinandana Grantha Samiti, 1946.
#Premī, Nāthūrām. ''Jain Sāhitya aur Itihās''. Second Edition. Mumbai: Samśodhita Sāhitya Mālā1, 1942/1956.
#Banārasīdāsa. ''Ardha Kathānaka''. Ed. with a detailed Preface by Nāthūrām Premī. Mumbai: Samśodhita Sāhitya Mālā2, 1946/1957. 
#Amrtacandra, Ācārya. {{IAST|''Puruṣārthasiddhyupāya''.} Ed. with an Introduction by Nāthūrām Premī. Āgās: Śrīmad Rājacandra Āśrama, 1904.
#Goyaliya, Ayodhyaprasad. ''Jain Jāgarana ke Agradūta''. Varanasi: Bhāratīya Jñānapītha, 1952 
#Śāstrī, Phūlcandra (Ed.). ''Paravāra Jain Samāj kā Itihās''. Jabalpur: ŚrīDigambara Jain Paravāra Sabhā, 1992.

Footnotes and References


External links
*http://www.gohgk.com
*http://www.hindibooks.8m.com
*http://www.jainstudy.org

Category:Jainism
Category:Indian Jains
Category:Jain writers
Category:Indian writers