

BenQ Corporation (; )is a Taiwanese company specializing in the manufacturing of computing, communications, and consumer electronics devices.

Name

The company was established in 1984, initially known as Acer Peripherals Inc., then Acer CM (Communications and Multimedia), and finally rebranded as BenQ;http://www.benq.com/page/?pageId=6; in December 2001. BenQ Corporation is part of the BenQ Group, which also includes AU Optronics.

The name reflects their corporate motto or vision:
Bringing Enjoyment aNd Quality to life. In June 2007 the company announced that it will change its name to Qisda.[http://www.digitimes.com/displays/a20070620PD215.html]

Company

BenQ manufactures technology products, including communication and personal computer related products. Its principal products include TFT LCD monitors and televisions, scanners and printers, projectors, laptops, computer keyboards, mice, and mobile phones.

The head office is located in Taoyuan, Taiwan, and the company operates worldwide. BenQ owns and operates branch offices in key markets, and employ over 15,000+ individuals. Three business groups manage BenQ's product lines: Mobile Communications Business Group, Digital Media Business Group and Integrated Manufacturing and Services Business Group.

BenQ Corp. has various manufacturing facilities around the World.They include facilities in Taiwan, People's Republic of China, Mexico, Czech Republic (Brno) and Brazil (Manaus).

Recent developments

On October 1, 2005, BenQ acquired the mobile devices division of Germany's Siemens AG, becoming the 6th largest company in the mobile phone industry by accumulated market share.The acquisition results in a new business group, BenQ-Siemens, of BenQ Corporation entirely dedicated to wireless communications. Mobile phones of the new group are marketed under a new brand, BenQ-Siemens.

On August 24, 2006 BenQ announced plans to spin-off its manufacturing operations in early 2007, separating contract manufacturing and own-brand divisions.

In late September 2006, the mobile devices division of BenQ, BenQ Mobile (Germany), announced bankruptcy when BenQ Corp. discontinued its funding.As a result, BenQ Mobile was effectively placed under the supervision of a state-appointed bankruptcy administrator. In February 2007, BenQ Mobile was finally disbanded as a suitable buyer could not be found.An estimated 2000 BenQ Mobile employees lost their jobs. 

On August 2006, the company signed a sponsorship contract with the Spanish football club Real Madrid, merging with the existent Siemens logo.

See also
*List of digital camera brands
*Products of Acquired Siemens Mobile Division

References


External links

*[http://www.benq.com/ BenQ.com Global site]

Category:Companies established in 1984
Category:Consumer electronics brands
Category:Electronics companies of Taiwan
Category:Display technology companies
Category:Portable audio player manufacturers
Category:Companies listed on the Taiwan Stock Exchange
Category:Taiwan brands

cs:BenQ
de:BenQ
es:BenQ
fr:BenQ
gl:BenQ
it:BenQ
nl:BenQ
ja:BenQ
pl:BenQ
pt:BenQ
ro:BenQ
ru:BenQ
fi:BenQ
tr:BenQ
zh:佳世達科技