;
Image:20070601 Victory Monument (2).JPG|thumb|right|250px|The Victory Monument in the Black Metropolis-Bronzeville District is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

The South Side is a major part of the city of Chicago, which is located in Cook County, Illinois, United States. Much of it has evolved from the incorporation of independent townships, such as Hyde Park Township, that have been annexed by the city. Regions of the city, referred to as sides, are divided by the Chicago River and its branches.;;;; The South Side of Chicago was originally defined as all of the city south of the Chicago River,;;;; but it now excludes the Loop.; The South Side has a varied ethnic composition, and it has great disparity in income and other demographic measures.; The South Side covers 60% of the city's land area, with a higher ratio of single-family homes and larger sections zoned for industry than the rest of the city.;;;;

Although it has endured a reputation as being poor and crime-infested, the reality is more varied, and it ranges from impoverished to working class to affluent.;;;;
Neighborhoods such as Armour Square, Back of the Yards, Bridgeport, Little Village and Pullman tend to be composed of more blue collar residents, while the Jackson Park Highlands District, Hyde Park, Mount Greenwood, Morgan Park and Beverly tend to have middle and upper class residents.;;

The South Side boasts a broad array of cultural and social offerings, such as professional sports teams, landmark buildings, nationally renowned museums, elite educational institutions, world class medical institutions, and major parts of the city's elaborate parks system. The South Side is serviced by bus and train via the Chicago Transit Authority and a number of Metra lines.;;In addition, it has several Interstate highways and United States highways to serve vehicular traffic.;;

Boundaries
Community areas of Chicago by number
Chinatown gate
The downtown &quot;Loop&quot; district (#32) is south of the river, but changing geographic and social perspectives have caused the contemporary definition of the &quot;South Side&quot; to exclude the Loop.;;;;Further confusing the issue, Chicago's address numbering system uses Madison Street (which runs east-west in the middle of the Loop) as the demarcation between north and south.;Hayner, Don and Tom McNamee, ''Streetwise Chicago'', &quot;Madison Street&quot;, p. 79, Loyola University Press, 1988, ISBN 0-8294-0597-6; Since the Loop's southern boundary is Roosevelt Road, many say that the South Side begins with the Near South Side (#33) community area, and, moving westward, it begins with the Armour Square (#34), Bridgeport (#60), McKinley Park (#59), Brighton Park (#58), Archer Heights (#57) and Garfield Ridge (#56) community areas.;This article covers the region defined with these border communities. To the south of these lie 35 more community areas of the city, making the South Side defined by Roosevelt Road larger than the North and West Sides combined. Lake Michigan and the Indiana state line border provide eastern boundaries that remain constant. The southern border has changed over time because of Chicago's evolving city limits.

=Subdivisions=
The exact boundaries dividing the Southwest, South and Southeast Sides vary by source,;; but following mostly racial lines, the South Side is further divided into a White and Hispanic Southwest Side, a largely Black South Side, and a smaller, more racially diverse Southeast Side centered on the East Side (#52) community area, and including the adjacent community areas of South Chicago (#46), South Deering (#51), and Hegewisch (#55).;; The differing interpretations about the boundary between the South and Southwest Sides are due to a lack of a definite natural or artificial dividing boundary.; However, one source opines that the boundary is best defined as the railroad tracks east of Western Avenue.; 

Southwest Side
Midway Airport serves the South Side with connections to the nation and the world.
The black population of Chicago;;
The Southwest Side of Chicago is a subsection of the South Side comprising mainly residential, predominantly white and Hispanic neighborhoods. Architecturally, the Southwest Side is distinguished by the tract of Chicago's Bungalow Belt, which runs through it.

Archer Heights, a Polish enclave along Archer Avenue, which leads toward Midway Airport, is located on the Southwest Side of the city, as is Beverly (#72), home to a large concentration of Irish Americans. Beverly hosts the annual South Side Irish Parade, which typically draws a larger crowd than the St. Patrick's Day parade in Chicago's Loop. In fact, the parade is said to be the largest Irish neighborhood St. Patrick's celebration in the world outside of Dublin, Ireland,;; and it is broadcast on Chicago's CBS affiliate.;;The Southwest Side is also home to the largest concentration of Górals, (Carpathian highlanders) outside of Europe; it is the location of the Polish Highlanders Alliance of North America.

The South Side Irish Parade is not the South Side's only large parade. The Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic, the second largest parade in the United States and the nation's largest African-American parade,;; runs through the South Side.

The South Side has a prominent role in the Chicago 2016 Olympic bid.

Athletics
The South Side hosts two major professional athletic teams. Major League Baseball's Chicago White Sox play at U.S. Cellular Field in the Armour Square community area, while the National Football League's Chicago Bears play at Soldier Field in the Near South Side community area.;;;;Formerly, it has hosted the Chicago American Giants of the Negro National Leagues and the Chicago Cardinals of the National Football League.; 

=2016 Olympic bid=

The South Side will play a prominent role in Chicago's bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics. The Olympic Village is planned in the Douglas (#35) community area across Lake Shore Drive from Burnham Park.;;In addition, the Olympic Stadium is expected to be located in the Chicago Park District's Washington Park located in the Washington Park (#40) community area.;;Many Olympic events will be hosted in these community areas as well as other parts of the South Side if the plan succeeds.;;

History
Union Stock Yards, 1941
=Demographics=
Image:20070601 Wells House (2).JPG|thumb|160px|right|Ida Wells lived in the Ida Wells House, a Chicago Landmarks in the Black Metropolis-Bronzeville Historic District|Bronzeville historic district.
With its factories, steel mills, and meat-packing plants, the South Side saw a sustained period of immigration which began around the 1860s and continued throughWorld War II. Irish, Italian, Polish and Lithuanian immigrants, in particular, settled in neighborhoods adjacent to industrial zones. African Americans resided in Douglas, Chicago#Bronzeville|Bronzeville (around 35th and State Streets) in an area called &quot;The Black Belt&quot;, and they later spread across the South Side after World War II. The Black Belt, which gave a new meaning to the term ghetto, arose from discriminatory real estate practices and the threat of violence in nearby white neighborhoods.;;

Post reconstruction black southerners migrated to Chicago in large numbers and caused the African American population to nearly quadruple from 4,000 to 15,000 between 1870 and 1890.;;The population was concentrated on the South Side. The migration continued into the 20th century when the Black population reached 40,000 by 1910, with 78% residing in the South Side's &quot;Black Belt&quot;, which extended for 30 blocks along State Street and was only a few blocks wide.; The migration of blacks to Chicago's South Side led to a white flight.;;

The South Side has had a history of racial segregation. During the 1920s and 1930s, much of the South Side was a hotbed of legal debate with cases such as Hansberry v. Lee, , rising to the U. S. Supreme Court in the Washington Park Subdivision. Another example of this segregation was the construction of the Dan Ryan Expressway, which separated some white neighborhoods from black neighborhoods (''e.g.'' the divide between Bridgeport and Douglas, Chicago#Bronzeville|Bronzeville). ;

Last Robert Taylor Home, 2005
After decades of sustaining some of the poorest housing conditions in the United States, the Chicago Housing Authority has begun replacing the old high-rise public housing with mixed-income, lower-density developments in what is known as the Plan for Transformation. Many of the CHA's massive public housing projects, which lined several miles of south State Street, have been torn down. Among the largest were the Robert Taylor Homes and the Cabrini-Green project.;;

Private sector redevelopment is occurring rapidly. Neighborhood rehabilitation (and, in some cases, gentrification) can also be seen in parts of Washington Park, Woodlawn (#42) and Bronzeville, as well as in Bridgeport and McKinley Park. Historic Pullman's redevelopment is another example of a work in progress. Chinatown, which has seen a surge in growth and has become an increasingly popular destination for both tourists and locals alike, is a cornerstone of the city's Chinese community. The South Loop's booming mid-decade construction suggests that the South Side will be populated with more Caucasians in the coming years.;;

White flight from the South Side has resulted in a high remaining percentage of African Americans. Thus, most neighborhoods south of 55th Street are predominantly black with a large Mexican American population residing in Little Village (South Lawndale) and areas south of 99th Street. Hyde Park is home to the University of Chicago as well as the South Side's largest Jewish population, which is centered around Chicago's oldest synagogue, the Chicago Landmark KAM Isaiah Israel.;;

Street gangs have been prominent on the South Side for over a century. By the 1960s, gangs such as the Vice Lords began to improve their public image, moving from thuggish ventures to obtaining government and private grants. By 2000, gangs crossed gender lines to include about a 20% female composition.;;

=Arts=
DuSable Museum located in Washington Park
South Shore Cultural Center
Chicago's African American community, which was concentrated on the South Side, experienced an artistic movement following the Harlem Renaissance in New York City. From the 1930s until the 1950s, the movement was concentrated in and around the Hyde Park community area and included Gwendolyn Brooks, Margaret Burroughs, Elizabeth Catlett, Eldzier Cortor, Gordon Parks, and Richard Wright.;; Other Chicago Black Renaissance artists included Willard Motley, William Attaway, Frank Marshall Davis and Margaret Walker. St. Clair Drake and Horace R. Cayton represented the new wave of intellectual expression in literature by depicting the culture of the urban ghetto rather than the culture of the blacks of the south in the monograph ''Black Metropolis'' (ISBN 0226162346).; In 1961, Burroughs founded the DuSable Museum, and by the late 60s the South Side had a resurgent art movement led by Jim Nutt, Gladys Nilsson and Karl Wirsum, who became known as the Chicago Imagists.

Music in Chicago flourished because labels with studios in New York City or Los Angeles only kept regional distribution offices in Chicago, which created a vacuum for many independent labels.;; In 1948, Blues was introduced by Aristocrat Records (later Chess Records), and Muddy Waters and Chess Records quickly followed with Little Walker, Jimmy Rogers, and Howlin' Wolf.;; Vee-Jay, the largest black owned label before Motown Records, was among the post-World War II companies that formed &quot;Record Row&quot; on Cottage Grove between 47th and 50th Streets and later (in the 1960s) along South Michigan Avenue.;;; Rhythm and blues continued to thrive after Record Row became the hub of gospelized R&amp;B, known as soul. Chicago continues as a prominent city for musical contribution.;

Many other artists have left their mark on Chicago's South Side. These include Upton Sinclair and James Farrell via fiction, Archibald Motley, Jr. via painting, Henry Moore and Lorado Taft via sculpture, and Thomas Dorsey and Mahalia Jackson via gospel music.;Since the arts have thrived on the South Side, the South Side has numerous art museums and galleries such as the DuSable Museum of African American History,;; National Museum of Mexican Art,;; National Vietnam Veterans Art Museum,;; and the David and Alfred Smart Museum of Art (known as the Smart Museum).;;In addition, cultural centers such as the South Shore Cultural Center, South Side Community Art Center and Hyde Park Art Center endeavor to avail art and culture to the public while fostering opportunities for artists.;;

=Socioeconomics=
The Midway at the University of Chicago
The South Side hosted the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition.
The Illinois Constitution gave rise to townships that provided municipal services in 1850. Several townships surrounding Chicago incorporated in order to better service their residents. However, growth and prosperity led to an overburdened government system. In 1889, most of these townships determined that they would be better off as part of a larger Chicago. Lake View, Jefferson, Cicero, Lake, and Hyde Park Townships were annexed.;;;;Today's South Side is mostly comprised of the old Hyde Park and Lake Townships. Within these townships many had made speculative bets on the future prosperity of the respective regions.Much of the South Side has evolved from these speculative investments. Stephen A. Douglas, Paul Cornell, George Pullman and various business entities have developed South Chicago real estate. The Pullman District, a company town, Hyde Park Township, various platted communities and subdivisions were the results of such efforts.;; 

The Union Stock Yards, which were once located in the South Side's New City community area (#61), at one point employed 25,000 people and produced 82 percent of the domestic meat consumption.;;They were so synonymous with the City for over a century that they were mentioned as part of the lyrics of Frank Sinatra's My Kind of Town in a phrase that says &quot;The Union Stockyard, Chicago is&quot;.;; The Union Stock Yard Gate marking the old entrance to stockyards was designated a Chicago Landmark on February 24 1972;; and a National Historic Landmark on May 29 1981.;;;; 

By the 1930s, Chicago boasted a composition which included over 25% residential structures less than 10 years old, many of which were bungalows. These continued to be built in the working-class South Side into the 1960s.;;;; Kitchenettes, often including Murphy beds and Pullman kitchens, also composed a large part of the housing supply during and after the Great Depression, especially in the Black Belt.;; Chicago's South Side had a history of philanthropic subsidized housing dating back to 1919.;; However, in 1949, the United States Congress passed the Housing Act to fund public housing. The CHA produced a plan of citywide projects that was rejected by some of the Chicago City Council's white aldermen who opposed public housing in their wards. This led to a CHA policy of construction of family housing in black residential areas, which led to concentrations on the South and West Sides of the city.;; 

Gentrification of parts of the Douglas community area has bolstered the Black Metropolis-Bronzeville Historic District.;; Gentrification in various parts of the South Side has displaced many African Americans.;; The South Side hosts numerous cooperatives. Hyde Park has several middle-income co-ops, and other South Side regions have limited equity (subsidized, price controlled) co-ops.;; These regions have experienced condominium construction and conversion in the 1970s and 1980s.;In addition, the South Side has regions that have been known for extreme wealth and opulence such as Prairie Avenue, which is experiencing a 21st century redevelopment that includes One Museum Park and One Museum Park West.;;

The South Side has over time accommodated much of the city's tourism with its various convention centers. The current McCormick Place Convention Center is the largest convention center in the United States, and the third largest in the world.;;Previously, the South Side hosted conventions at the Chicago Coliseum and the International Amphitheatre.; Although the South Side does not have any offerings that rival the Magnificent Mile, it does have the Ford City Mall and the surrounding shopping district which includes several Big-box store|big-box retailers.

=Prostitution=
Chicago's reputation for political corruption stems from tolerance of vices such as prostitution. Early prostitution occurred in the central business district. However, the disreputables were eventually pushed to the South Side, creating the Levee, one of the nation's most infamous sex districts. Although Chicago Mayor Carter Harrison II closed the Levee in 1912 and much of the trade moved to the suburbs, nightclubs on the South Side had an ample supply of prostitutes.;; Among those who cared for and rehabilitated persons charged with prostitution were a small group of the Good Shepherd Sisters who eventually became the first nuns to serve African Americans on Chicago's South Side.;;

Education
De La Salle Institute has taught 5 Chicago Mayors.
With the University of Chicago and the University of Chicago Lab School, the South Side host educational institutions that are considered to be elite.;;In addition to being highly ranked, the University of Chicago has had 16 Nobel Prizes awarded to persons of research or on faculty at the university at the time of the award announcement, placing it 6th among U.S. institutions.;; The De La Salle Institute, located in the Douglas, Chicago community area across the street from the Chicago Police Department headquarters, has taught many notable celebrities and 5 Chicago Mayors:;; Richard J. Daley, Michael A. Bilandic, Martin H. Kennelly, Frank J. Corr, and current mayor, Richard M. Daley. Three of these mayors hail from the South Side's Bridgeport community area, which has itself produced 5 Chicago Mayors. The University of Chicago hosts one of the nation's best medical centers at the University of Chicago Medical Center.;;The South Side also hosts its share of community colleges such as Olive-Harvey College, Kennedy-King College, Richard J. Daley College and other four-year educational institutions such as St. Xavier University, Chicago State University and the Illinois Institute of Technology.;Two concentrations of residents with post baccalaureate degrees are found on the South Side; Hyde Park/Kenwood and Beverly/Ashburn.;;

Landmarks
Frank Lloyd Wright's Robie House is a South Side landmark.
The South Side is home to many official landmarks and other notable buildings and structures.;;;;Since its construction in 1968, 1700 East 56th Street has been the tallest building on the South Side.;;However, One Museum Park, which is along Roosevelt Road, the northern border of the South Side, will soon take over this title.;;One Museum Park West, which will be next door to One Museum Park, will also be one of the tallest buildings in Chicago. 1700 East 56th will continue to be the tallest building south of 13th street. Although most of the other tall buildings in Chicago are in the Loop or Near North Side community areas, many Chicago Landmarks are located on the South Side. 

There is a large concentration of landmark buildings in the Black Metropolis-Bronzeville District.;; Also, buildings such as Powhatan Apartments, Robie House and John J. Glessner House are among the South Side landmarks.;;;;;; The South Side has many of Chicago's landmark places of worship such as Eighth Church of Christ, Scientist, First Church of Deliverance and K.A.M. Isaiah Israel Temple.;;;;; The South Side also has several landmark districts including two located in Barack Obama's Kenwood community area: Kenwood District, and North Kenwood District.;;;; In addition to its art museums the South Side hosts the Museum of Science and Industry, which although not an art museum has its place in the artistic fabric of the city.;;The Museum of Science and Industry is located in the Palace of Fine Arts, one of the few remaining buildings from the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition,;; which was hosted in South Side.

Chicago Race Riot gang violence
The South Side has been a place of political controversy. Although the locations of some of these notable controversies have not become officials landmarks, they remain important parts of Chicago history. The Chicago Race Riot of 1919 was the worst of the approximately 25 riots during the Red Summer of 1919 and required 6000 National Guard troops to quell.;;As mentioned above, segregation has been a political theme of controversy for some time on the South Side as exhibited by Hansberry v. Lee, .

Transportation
Chicago Skyway toll plaza
The Chicago 'L' serves Chicago and its suburbs.
The South Side is served extensively by mass transit as well as major roads and highways. In addition, Midway International Airport, which provides connections between the South Side and the world, is located on the South Side. Among the highways through the South Side are I-94 (which goes by the names Dan Ryan Expressway, Bishop Ford Freeway, and Kingery Expressway on the South Side), I-90 (which goes by the names Dan Ryan Expressway, and Chicago Skyway on the South Side), I-57, I-55 U.S. Route 12 in Illinois|U.S. 12, U.S. Route 20 in Illinois|U.S. 20, and U.S. Route 41 in Illinois|U.S. 41. Several Chicago Transit Authority (CTA) bus and train lines and Metra train lines link the South Side to rest of the city. The South Side is serviced by the Red, Green and Orange lines of the CTA, and the Rock Island District, Metra Electric, and South Shore Metra lines and a few stops on the SouthWest Service Metra line. In addition to standard local metropolitan bus service by the CTA, several South Side CTA express service bus routes provide the South Side with direct service into the Chicago Loop by running without stops along Lake Shore Drive.;;

Parks
The Chicago Half Marathon is an annual Chicago Marathon tune up that takes place along Lake Shore Drive.
The Chicago Park District boastsof parkland, 552 parks, 33 beaches, nine museums, two world-class conservatories, 16 historic lagoons, 10 bird and wildlife gardens.;; Many of these are on the South Side, including several large parks that are part of the legacy of Paul Cornell, the father of Hyde Park, and his service on the South Parks Commission. Chicago Park District parks serving the South Side include Burnham Park, Jackson Park, Washington Park, Midway Plaisance and Harold Washington Park. The parks of Chicago foster and host tremendous amounts of athletic activities. The South Side also has the only Illinois state park within the city of Chicago: William W. Powers State Recreation Area. In addition, several events cause the closure of parts of Lake Shore Drive. Although the Chicago Marathon causes many roads to be closed in its route that goes as far north as Wrigleyville and to Douglas, Chicago#Bronzeville|Bronzeville on the South Side, it does not cause any closures to the drive.;; However, on the South Side, the Chicago Half Marathon necessitates closures,;; and the entire drive is closed for Bike The Drive.;;

References in popular culture
The South Side's gritty reputation often makes its way into popular culture. 

*The opening lines of Jim Croce's song &quot;Bad, Bad Leroy Brown&quot; state that the South Side is &quot;the baddest part of town.&quot;;; 

*Richard Wright's novel ''Native Son'' (ISBN 006083756X) takes place on the South Side and focuses on the plight of African Americans in the ghetto, including the housing practices that created such slums.;; 

*Upton Sinclair's novel ''The Jungle'' (ISBN 1884365302) was a revelation about the Union Stock Yards at the turn of the 20th century.;;

*''A Raisin in the Sun'' (ISBN 0451183886) is a story of Lorraine Hansberry's youth growing up in the Woodlawn community area.;;

*''Barbershop'' and parts of ''The Blues Brothers'' take place on the South Side. David Auburn's play ''Proof'' takes place exclusively in the Hyde Park neighborhood; the film adaptation expands the setting.

*James T. Farrell|James T. Farrell's' novels, collectively called the ''Studs Lonigan Trilogy'', are set in an Irish neighborhood on the South Side.;;

References




Category:Geography of Chicago
Category:United States communities with African American majority populations

fr:South side (Chicago)