
The body of Dean Shillingsworth (2005 – 11 October 2007) ;; was discovered by children in a pond in Mandurama Reserve at Ambarvale, New South Wales, Australia on 17 October 2007. The body was inside a tartan suitcase and was badly decomposed. ;; Police subsequently arrested his mother Rachel Pfitzner who lived in nearby Rosemeadow. She was charged with Dean's murder. ;; Pfitzner allegedly admitted shaking the boy. ; ; She did not seek bail and was remanded in custody. ;; 

Background
According to Pfitzner's estranged father, she had three children, each with a different father. Dean had an older half-sister and a younger half-brother. ; ; ; ;

Government involvement
The New South Wales Department of List of New South Wales government agencies#Community Services|Community Services (DOCS) had sought a Family court warrant on 11 October to place Dean in the custody of his grandmother. When the order was served on Pfitzner on 18 October she advised police that Dean was already in the custody of DOCS. When it was subsequently realised that this was not correct police questioned Pfitzner further, leading to her arrest. ; ; Both DOCS and the New South Wales Ombudsman are conducting inquiries into the involvement of DOCS. ;;; ;

Community reaction
Many local residents gathered in Mandurama Reserve in the days following the discovery. An impromptu shrine of flowers and toys developed near the waters edge. 

When police escorted Pfitzner to the scene on 20 October the crowd jeered and surged towards the car. ; ;

A community ceremony for Dean held on 26 October at Mandurama Reserve and attended by 2000 people included prayers, balloons and floating candles. ;; ;; As an Aboriginal Australian, Dean was accorded a smoking ceremony.

Funeral
Dean Shillingsworth's funeral was conducted in Brewarrina his hometown. It was attended by over 300 family, friends and community members. It was held on Thursday, 1 November. ;;

Court case
Rachel Pfitzner appeared in court on 12 December 2007 via videolink from Silverwater Women's Correctional Centre. The case was adjourned without bail until 6 February 2008. ;;; ;

References
;

Category:2007 in Australia
Category:2007 crimes
Category:Crime in Sydney