

Hurricane Linda was a tropical cyclone of the 1997 Pacific hurricane season. It was the strongest hurricane ever observed in the North Eastern Pacific Ocean, with sustained winds of 185&amp;nbsp;mph, gusts to 220&amp;nbsp;mph, and a central pressure of 902&amp;nbsp;mbar. Linda was part of an abnormally active season for both the Eastern and Western Pacific Basins. Fortunately, the powerful system had little impact on the mainland, although it did pass directly over Socorro Island.

Storm history

A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 24. It moved across the unfavorable Atlantic Ocean without development. As it crossed Central America convection increased, and a poorly-defined center developed early on September 9. Banding and convection increased, and it became a tropical depression that night, 460 miles (740 km) south of the Mexican port of Manzanillo, Colima.; ;

Tropical Depression 14-E continued northwestward, and became a tropical storm on September 10. Linda started to intensify more quickly, becoming a hurricane on the 11th 545 miles (880 km) south-southeast of the southern tip of Baja California. After 30 hours of rapidly intensifying, Linda reached its peak with 185 mph (295 km/h) winds on September 12. ; Linda moved directly over Socorro Island that same day as a Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale. Over the next few days, cooler waters weakened the storm greatly, and Linda dissipated on September 17.;
;;

Preparations

At one point on September 13, some computer models were predicting that the hurricane would recurve and make landfall in California. A trough was located in the vicinity of the hurricane. Winds caused by that trough would have recurved the hurricane towards southern California.;; Due to the possible threat, some media sources indicated that hurricane conditions would affect southern California. However, the National Weather Service in Oxnard, California issued a statement that stressed the uncertainty of the hurricane's path. The statement also indicated the main threat to be rainfall and rough seas.;;

The large waves caused by Hurricane Linda also resulted in flood warnings being issued for part of the Mexican coast.;;
;;
Impact
Hurricane Linda near peak intensity
Hurricane Linda never came near mainland North America. It did pass over Socorro Island on September 12, where it cut power to meteorological instruments.; Large waves caused by the system caused minor flooding in the Mexican states of Michoacán, Nayarit, Jalisco, and Sinaloa. Those waves also caused hotels and resorts to close in Cabo San Lucas, Mazatlán, La Paz, San Carlos, and Puerto Vallarta.;;

The hurricane also produced strong waves of up to 15&amp;nbsp;feet in height along the coast of California.;; These waves swept five people off of a jetty in Newport Beach. The people were rescued and survived, although one was badly injured.; Moisture from Linda, which contributed to hourly rates of 2.5&amp;nbsp;inches in Forest Falls, caused severe flooding and mudslides in southern California. One mudslide destroyed 2 houses and damaged 77. Damage totaled to $3.2&amp;nbsp;million (1997 USD, $3.8 million 2005 USD).;

Because Linda did little or no damage due to it remaining over open waters, the name was not retired by the World Meteorological Organization. It was used again during the 2003 season. It is scheduled to be used again during the 2009 Pacific hurricane season.

See also
* List of Category 5 Pacific hurricanes
* List of notable Pacific hurricanes

References


External links
* [http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/1997linda.html NHC Linda report]
* [http://www.weather.unisys.com/hurricane/e_pacific/1997/LINDA/track.gif Storm Path]



Category:1997 Pacific hurricane season|Linda
Category:Category 5 Pacific hurricanes|Linda (1997)
Category:Hurricanes in Jalisco|Linda (1997)
Category:Hurricanes in Michoacán|Linda (1997)
Category:Hurricanes in Nayarit|Linda (1997)
Category:Hurricanes in Baja California Sur|Linda (1997)
Category:Hurricanes in Sinaloa|Linda (1997)
Category:Hurricanes in Sonora|Linda (1997)
Category:California hurricanes|Linda (1997)

de:Hurrikan Linda (1997)
sv:Orkanen Linda
zh:颶風琳達 (1997年)