


The Ford Taurus is an automobile manufactured by the Ford Motor Company in the United States. Initially a front-wheel drive mid-size car, it was introduced in December 1985, replacing the rear-wheel drive Ford LTD. Today's Taurus is a full-size car available in front- or all-wheel drive. The Taurus was mainly sold in North America, but the third generation model was exported to Europe, Asia, and Australia in a slightly modified form. Throughout its life, the Taurus has had a Mercury sibling, the Sable. Most Tauruses have been built in Chicago, Illinois or in Ford's Hapeville Plant near Atlanta, Georgia.

The original Taurus was a milestone design for Ford and the entire American automotive industry, as well as a very influential vehicle in the marketplace. Ford has sold over 6.7&amp;nbsp;million Tauruses worldwide during its 20 years of production.;; Between 1992 and 1996, the Taurus was the best-selling car in the United States, prompting Honda to grow the U.S. version of the Accord to a similar size.;; The Taurus eventually lost its best-seller status in 1997 to the Toyota Camry.;;

Production initially ended on October 27, 2006, with 2007 being the last model year.;; However, Ford revived the Taurus name by renaming the facelifted Ford Five Hundred and Ford Freestyle &quot;Taurus&quot; and &quot;Taurus X&quot;, respectively,;;; and have announced that a new Taurus is in development for a 2010 release.;

Development
Taurus clay model along with many of the original design sketches.

When Ford set out to develop the Taurus, they employed a strategy of teamwork that would prove revolutionary in the car development process.;; Previously, at both Ford and General Motors, interior and exterior designers worked separately with no input from each other or from engineers. As a result, the interiors and exteriors of many American cars seemed &quot;mismatched&quot;.; Taurus development started in 1981, using a method similar to that Ford used when developing the Escort, in which engineers from all Ford branches worldwide worked together.;; Unlike the Escort, though, the Taurus was developed entirely by American engineers at Ford's headquarters.; The new engineering team was assembled by designer Jack Telnack, and was dubbed &quot;Team Taurus&quot;.;

The Taurus went through many revisions throughout its development. Original prototypes contained a full glass roof similar to that of the Subaru SVX, though it was deemed &quot;too radical&quot; and abandoned.; Customer input played an instrumental role in the Taurus' development, as many components including radios, steering wheels, seats, wheels, and entire suspension setups were selected by large numbers of average people though a series of surveys conducted by Ford.; In addition, Ford disassembled many competing cars such as the Toyota Camry, the Honda Accord, and the more luxurious BMW 5 Series in order to examine their parts and components.;

Ford premiered the Taurus in a resounding way. In mid-1985, Ford gathered executives and the press for the unveiling of the Taurus and Mercury Sable. The event took place at the MGM Studios Soundstage 85, where ''Gone with the Wind'' had been filmed.; The studio was decorated in a space theme, with stars on the walls, flying saucer decorations, and refreshments served in flying saucer shaped coolers.; For the unveiling, &quot;space&quot; music started playing, as projected stars floated around the room in dance floor fashion. The outlines of the cars glowed green through the curtain; as the curtain flew up, strobe lights flashed, highlighting the cars.; Many industry journalists, as well as executives at Ford and Chrysler, believed the Taurus was going to be a failure.; Chrysler executives believed customers would instead embrace their more conventional Dodge Dynasty and Chrysler New Yorker.; Executives at Ford knew producing the Taurus was a gamble, as they ran the risk of the car being so advanced it would turn off potential customers. As a result, Ford continued to produce the LTD, which the Taurus was designed to replace in 1986.; If the Taurus failed, Ford would have to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy.; The Taurus, however, ended up being a resounding success, selling over a million units in its first generation alone.;

First generation (1986 – 1991)

| length = Sedan: ;Station wagon: 
| width = 
| height = 1986-88 Sedan: ;1989-1991 Sedan: ;1986-88 Wagon: ;1989-1991 Wagon: 
| aka =
| weight = 
| related = Mercury Sable;Lincoln Continental
}}

The first-generation Taurus was launched in 1986 to strong fanfare and sales, replacing the slow-selling LTD. Upon the Taurus' debut, Ford was producing a range of rear-wheel drive cars, as Chrysler and General Motors offered more front-wheel drive vehicles. With the introduction of the Tempo, Ford had started its own transition to front-wheel drive. The Taurus displayed a rounder shape than its contemporaries, often likened to a 'jelly bean' or 'flying potato',;; inspired by the design of the Audi 100#C3, 1983–92|Audi 5000 and Ford's own Tempo. The aerodynamic design of the Taurus was not purely cosmetic, however. Its aerodynamic shape made the car more fuel efficient, allowing Ford to meet the more stringent Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards applied by the United States government.; The Taurus' success ultimately led to an American automobile design revolution; Chrysler and General Motors developed aerodynamic cars in order to capitalize on the Taurus' success.;

The Taurus and Sable used flush aerodynamic composite headlights, and were the first mainstream sedans from a U.S. automaker to use the new lights. Instead of a conventional grille, the Taurus had a front panel to adopt a grille-less 'bottom breather' nose, first pioneered by the Citroën DS in the 1950s, and also used briefly on the Mustang. Some special performance models were fitted with additional ventilation openings. The Sable twin had a wraparound &quot;lightbar&quot; with two headlights and a low-wattage stretch in between. The doors went into the roof, and the handles were recessed. The Taurus also had large glass areas, which were flushed into the body, not recessed. 

The interior was available with bucket seats, a rare feature for most American mid-size sedans at the time, and the dashboard wrapped around the driver and flowed into the door panels to create more of a &quot;cockpit&quot; feel.; The interior contained many innovations, such as a storage box on the rear shelf,; seats designed to provide maximum comfort for their occupant no matter what position they were in,; and a rear seat that was raised slightly higher than the front seat so rear passengers could see the road ahead of them.;

1989-1991 Ford Taurus wagon

The Taurus originally came in four models, MT-5, L, GL, and LX. The MT-5 and L models were basic, starting at US$10,500, with the GL offering a few interior upgrades like rear headrests and a folding armrest, as well as the standard 3.0&amp;nbsp;litre V6.; The LX was loaded with air conditioning, power windows, power seats, electric door locks, a cassette stereo and cruise control, although these features were also available as options on the other cars. The top-of-the-line LX station wagon sold for $14,300.;

For 1986, the engines were a 90&amp;nbsp;horsepower (67&amp;nbsp;kW) 2.5&amp;nbsp;litre ''HSC'' four-cylinder found in the MT-5 and L models or a new 140&amp;nbsp;horsepower (104&amp;nbsp;kW) 3.0&amp;nbsp;litre Vulcan V6, optional on the L and standard on the GL and LX models. The MT-5 was equipped with a five-speed manual transmission, Vulcan models used a newly-designed four-speed AXOD automatic, while HSC-equipped cars used the 3-speed ATX automatic. Ford's 3.8&amp;nbsp;litre Essex V6 was added to the lineup in 1988. Although the power output was rated at the same 140&amp;nbsp;horsepower (104&amp;nbsp;kW) as the 3.0&amp;nbsp;litre engine, this V6 produced 215&amp;nbsp;ft•lbf (291&amp;nbsp;N•m) of torque. However, the 3.8 is known for premature failure of head gaskets.;

In 1990, the interior received a facelift, incorporating a new steering wheel design with an airbag, a new gear shifter and a new dashboard with a new instrument panel.; The 2.5&amp;nbsp;litre four was given sequential fuel injection, increasing power by 15&amp;nbsp;horsepower (11.2&amp;nbsp;kW) and torque by 10&amp;nbsp;ft•lbf (13.6&amp;nbsp;N•m), as did the 3.0&amp;nbsp;litre V6, although output remained the same for that engine.; All but the SHO were fitted with a four-speed automatic for 1990 and a new electronic Ford AXOD-E transmission|AXOD-E transmission in 1991. LX cars were also fitted with anti-lock brakes as standard that year.;

=First generation SHO=
Ford Taurus SHO with the &quot;Plus&quot; package

In 1989, Ford added the performance-oriented SHO model, which stands for &quot;Super High Output&quot;.; This was substantiated by a Yamaha 3.0 L V6 that made 220 hp and 200 ft·lbf.Although Ford's reasons for creating the SHO are unclear, it is best known that it was created to use up engines that were meant for a competitor for the Toyota MR2 and Pontiac Fiero that was shelved in the middle of development.;; As a result, Ford initially advertised the SHO as a limited production vehicle.;; However, the SHO turned out to be more successful than Ford had expected, and production continued after 1989.;

The SHO differed from the normal Taurus on the exterior by having different bumpers, side cladding, fog lamps, and a rear spoiler. The interior also differed, with sports seats and an 8000&amp;nbsp;rpm tachometer. The SHO became the only Taurus to feature a manual transmission since the MT5 was discontinued in that year.;;

A special edition of the SHO called the Plus package became available in 1991. It came as part of option package #212A and contained different styling cues from the standard SHO, including a plastic 'Power Bulge' hood, a plastic spoiler without the 3rd brake light, 24V V6 badges, body colored molding, non-painted mirrors, body color TAURUS badge, and non-SHO 'slicer' wheels.There were two special sub-options to the Plus package: White painted cars came with white painted wheels, and a plus exclusive Jade Green (sometimes called Deep Jade Green) was available only in 1991.;;

Second generation (1992–1995)

| length = Sedan: ;Station wagon: 
| width = 
| height = Sedan: –;Station wagon: 
| aka =
| weight = –
| related = Mercury Sable;Lincoln Continental;Ford Windstar
}}

The Taurus received its first significant cosmetic update in 1992. With the older model facing slumping sales, this new model brought sales back up again, with 410,000 examples sold during 1992, a number unheard of even today.; While the design was basically the same, every body panel except for the roof was changed. Ford also gave the Taurus what they called a 'smarter appointed interior',;; which offered such luxuries as electronic automatic climate control (an option for the LX and, later, SE; standard on SHO models), power sliding moonroof, leather seats, as well as other features. Wagon versions that retained the front bench seat and were equipped with the optional rear facing third seat had seating capacity for eight passengers. The Taurus was the best-selling car in the United States for every year of this cosmetic update.;
1992 Taurus GL wagon. The base model Tauruses had grey bumpers and side trim for 1992 only. In 1993, these parts became color keyed, just like in the higher model Tauruses.
The 2.5L four-cylinder engine had been eliminated after 1991, making the 3.0&amp;nbsp;litre V6 standard in all non-SHO models (except the LX Wagon, which had the 3.8L standard) from 1992-on. The next year (1993), the cheaper L base model was dropped, as well as the &quot;InstaClear&quot; heated windshield and the front cornering lamps on LX models.; For both 3.0L and 3.8&amp;nbsp;litre V6 engines, the drive belt system became a single-belt setup for 1993 (previously, the alternator had used a separate belt). A passenger-side airbag became standard for 1994, including a redesigned drivers side airbag and steering wheel (though this newer look had been on the SHO since 1993).; Also for 1994, all wheel options were now 15&amp;nbsp;inches. Previously, 14&amp;nbsp;inch wheels were standard on GL models. For 1994 and 1995, the LX model received unique crystiline headlamps.;;

The last year of this updated Taurus generation was 1995. For the 1995 model year, a sportier ''SE'' model was added.; It featured alloy wheels which were borrowed from the LX, had combination leather/cloth bucket seats separated by a console, unique &quot;Crystalline&quot; headlamp assemblies also borrowed from the LX, and a rear deck lid &quot;lip&quot; spoiler borrowed from the SHO.; The SE trim had either the standard 3.0L Vulcan V6 or the optional 3.8L Essex V6.;

The second generation also came in a modified Police version. A police Taurus was a GL trim with the 3.8&amp;nbsp;litre Essex V6 engine that was slightly different than the regular Essex engine.;; The police version of this engine uses high silicone alloy pistons which can be identified by two notches in the top of the piston. Output of the police Essex version was 15&amp;nbsp;bhp greater than the standard due to the addition of a dual exhaust muffler system, similar to that standard on the SHO; a Y-pipe was added after the resonator which allowed for the split to both sides of the rear of the vehicle.;; Other changes included a larger fuel tank, stainless steel brake lines, standard 4-wheel disc brakes with ABS, a modified front grille fascia that had a slit in it to allow for increased airflow to the radiator, and a calibrated 140&amp;nbsp;mph speedometer.;

=Second generation SHO=
Image:Ford Taurus SHO (second-gen).jpg|thumb|left|A second generation SHO
The SHO model continued with the same powertrain as before: The Yamaha-developed 3.0L V6 and 5-speed manual transmission. The second generation SHO also got its own front fascia that was basically the Mercury Sable's front fascia with a different bumper, fog lamps, and no middle lightbar.;; The SHO also got unique seats, wheels, side cladding, dual exhaust, as well as a unique rear bumper. 

The lack of an automatic transmission had hurt sales, which was a situation that Ford rectified in 1993. A 3.2&amp;nbsp;L version of the Ford SHO V6 engine was introduced for automatic-equipped SHO, which still had 220&amp;nbsp;hp (164&amp;nbsp;kW), but now boasted 215&amp;nbsp;ft•lbf (292&amp;nbsp;N•m), a 15&amp;nbsp;ft•lbf (20.3&amp;nbsp;N•m) increase over the 3.0&amp;nbsp;L version.;

In 1993, Ford did a minor redesign of the SHO interior, updating the center console. Other changes for 1993 included a trunklid spoiler, with integrated center high mount stop lamp.;

The second generation SHO entered popular culture due to the fact that a 1992 model is owned by comedian Conan O'Brien, and that he often talks about it on Late Night with Conan O'Brien, his late night talk show, when speaking about his personal life and interests.;; He devoted a special segment of the show to his SHO onetime, where in a fictional skit, he set off to sell the vehicle and use the money to buy a large estate in Europe. In the skit, he fails to sell the car, but then pretends to sell the car to Brad Pitt. 

By request of Car and Driver magazine, a SHO station wagon was created by the Car and Driver staff with the help of Ford engineers.;; They started with a production Taurus wagon, and from there installed SHO bodywork, including its unique front end. They then replaced the stock engine and drivetrain with SHO drivetrain. Inside, the interior was replicated of that of a high spec SHO sedan, including its sport seats, steering wheel, and included most of the SHO's equipment.; The staff then tested it, and took it on a cross country trip. The model became nothing more than a one off special, and the Car and Driver staff as well as Ford admitted that the SHO wagon was created &quot;just for fun&quot;, and was never meant to be a serious production vehicle.;

Third generation (1996–1999)

| length = Sedan: ;Station wagon: 
| width = 
| height = Sedan: ;Station wagon: 
| aka = 
| weight = 
| related = Mercury Sable;Lincoln Continental;Ford Windstar
}}

The 1996 model year saw the first complete redesign for the Taurus. Developing the new Taurus was hard on Ford's designers and engineers, as they claimed that completely redesigning the Taurus would be comparable to &quot;repainting the Mona Lisa.&quot;; As a result, they went through many different designs, and spent months trying to perfect the design of the new Taurus.; Ford wanted the new Taurus to be just as groundbreaking as the original 1986 Taurus, so they designed many new features for the new Taurus, including the &quot;Integrated Control Panel&quot;, which combined the controls for the radio and air conditioning into one panel, and the &quot;flip/fold center console&quot;, in which bench seat equipped cars could have the center of the bench fold out into a console with cupholders.; The Taurus' designers also specially tuned every panel so every the sound made from the door closing to the windshield wipers working was acoustically pleasing.;;; The new Taurus was designed with safety in mind as well, as the body was better structurally reinforced than that of the outgoing model.;
Taurus wagon
Ford had hoped the radical redesign would lead to the same success it had had with the 1986 Taurus. Ford even went as far as predicting that the new Taurus would continue the outgoing model's record of selling over 400,000 units a year.; However, the controversial oval theme was not well received by the press. Motor Trend stated, &quot;It will shock some, and delight others.&quot;; Although the Taurus managed to continue as America's best selling car for that year, it lost that status in 1997 when Toyota launched a redesigned Camry.;;;;;

The new Taurus cost more than the outgoing model; the suggested retail price for the 1996 model increased US$2,500 over the 1995 model.; However, Ford introduced a basic &quot;G&quot; trim line mid way through the 1996 model year.;; Thus, the trim lines consisted of the G at the bottom, with the GL as the mid priced model, and the LX as the most luxurious. The 1996 model year was the first time that the Taurus did not have an optional engine. The base G and GL had the (145&amp;nbsp;hp (108&amp;nbsp;kW) 3.0&amp;nbsp;L Vulcan V6, while the high end LX got the 3.0&amp;nbsp;L DOHC Ford Duratec engine#Duratec 30|Duratec 30 V6.

1998–1999 Taurus sedan

In an effort to reverse the declining sales of the Taurus, Ford tried to increase its appeal by making some cosmetic changes for the 1998 and 1999 model years. These changes included redesigning the grille openings in the front, changing the design from two oval openings to a full width opening for the air dam and moving the Ford logo down into an enlarged opening between the lights, mounted onto a Jaguar-esque 'motif bar'. These years were also fitted with different headlight lenses, featuring completely clear lenses and a multi-reflector surface in the rear of the housing, around the bulb; these were known as the 'disco ball' headlights. The rear turn signal lenses were changed from amber to red, to match the rest of the lightbar assembly.; Ford also eliminated the two downmarket trim levels, G and GL, made the LX the most basic trim level, and reinstated the upscale ''SE'' model from 1995, which featured a harder suspension and four-wheel disc brakes.;;



Although all 1998 models had the option of the DOHC Ford Duratec Engine#Duratec 30|Duratec engine, it was only available on the SE for 1999.;; That same year, front bucket seats became optional on the LX.; Ford claimed that the 1999 Duratec had less power than the 2000 Duratec in hopes to increase sales of the 2000 Taurus.;;

1997 Australian-market Taurus Ghia

As well as being sold in the North American market, third generation models were sent abroad to places such as Australia, Hong Kong, Japan and New Zealand, in right-hand drive configuration. However, this action proved unsuccessful.;; In these markets, it wore Mercury Sable headlamps, a unique front bumper cover with inset parking and turn signal lamps, and a Taurus-style rear, due to those countries' regulations regarding automotive lighting. Some minor changes were made to the interior besides the change to right hand drive, they also featured a handbrake, which was never available on North American Tauruses, and the radio was reversed. Australians and New Zealanders tended to stay away from the cars, due to their high price; a well equipped, larger-engined rear-wheel drive Ford Fairmont cost around the same amount.; While the Japanese market was offered the station wagon, Australian buyers could only opt for a single-spec sedan, known as the ''Taurus Ghia''.;

=Third generation SHO=
1997 Ford Taurus
For 1996, the SHO model was redesigned. Unlike its predecessors, this SHO was more refined and used less radical bodywork. It differed from the normal Taurus with different seats, wheels, bumpers, drivetrain, as well as a fin being put on the driver's side windshield wiper, to keep it on the windshield at high speeds. Unlike the previous SHOs though, this model was designed for comfort instead of performance.;;

A 235&amp;nbsp;hp (175&amp;nbsp;kW) 3.4&amp;nbsp;L DOHC V8 was specified for the SHO model, but it was given the same four speed transmission as the LX: the manual gearbox option was no longer offered on the SHO.; Separation of the camshaft from its sprocket has been implicated in a growing number of engine failures, at around the 50,000&amp;nbsp;mile (80,000&amp;nbsp;km) mark.; The standard warranty on this model was 36,000&amp;nbsp;miles (58,000&amp;nbsp;km). This problem can be rectified by having the camshafts welded.;; This SHO model sold in lower numbers than the previous SHO generations, with sales peaking at 9,000 units in 1997.;; As a result, Ford cut the SHO when redesigning the Taurus for its fourth generation.

Fourth generation (2000–2007)

| length = Sedan: ;Station wagon: 
| width = 
| height = Sedan: ;Station wagon: 
| weight = 
| related = Mercury Sable;Lincoln Continental
}}

The Taurus received another redesign in 2000, which replaced many of the oval derived design elements of the previous model. The redesign also featured a taller roof over the rear-passenger space as well as a taller trunk, significantly increasing room.; The interior was completely redesigned, although certain elements of the interior were retained from the outgoing model, such as the integrated control panel, which combined the sound system and climate controls into one panel. The suspension was also softened to appeal to a broader, non-sporting audience.; Electrically-adjustable pedals became an option on the 2000 Taurus.; To reduce the price to keep it competitive, Ford did cost cutting on the car, such as giving the Taurus rear drum brakes, eliminating the dual exhaust on the higher end models, and trimming many other small features.;; The SHO model was also dropped.

The new Taurus was designed with safety in mind. It had a host of new safety features, including extra frame reinforcing, traction control and new optional side front seat mounted driver and passenger air bags were added (which would become options in 2002) as well as a new system what Ford called the &quot;Personal Safety System&quot;, which measured crash severity, and tightened the seat belts and inflated the airbag to match.; As a result, the 2000 Taurus got a five star crash safety rating from the NHTSA.;;
Taurus wagon
The trim lines were completely rearranged for the 2000 model year. The most basic model was the LX, with the SE as the mid priced model, a new trim named &quot;SES&quot; as the value model, and the SEL as the highest end model, with the SEL slotting just under the Mercury Sable GS.

The 2002 Taurus offered two free options on every trim level, including a CD player and power driver's seat on the ''SE'', a power moonroof or leather interior on the ''SES'' and both of these luxury options on the ''SEL''. Side airbags and traction control were added as options on all models.;

The SEL trim line got slightly redesigned for 2003, to give it a more upscale image. Among the changes it got was that it got a new instrument cluster, wheels, as well as the dash getting slightly redesigned, with woodgrain trim replacing the black trim. It also got woodgrain on the steering wheel rim and around the power window switches on the front doors.; Also in 2003, Ford created a Centennial Version Taurus to celebrate Ford's 100th anniversary. This special Taurus included many extras, such as lighter wood trim, special leather seats, headlights with black accents, special wheels, a special leather case for the owner's manual, a leather jacket that said &quot;Ford:100 years&quot;, a similar watch, and a letter from William Clay Ford, Jr. Production was limited to 3,000 units.;;

SES Sport RimsFor 2003 and 2004, the SES Deluxe model received a &quot;Sport&quot; package, which consisted of special, unique rims, similar in design to the SHO &quot;Slicer&quot; rims that were featured on later Gen I SHOs and all Gen II SHOs, and the Duratec engine, mated to the AX4N transmission, standard.In addition, the exterior of the vehicle received Sport badging on the front quarter-panels, the interior received two-toned cloth seats, a two-toned dash applique, special &quot;Sport&quot; floor mats, and a leather covered steering wheel.To complete the package, the &quot;spears&quot; on the front of rear of the vehicle, which housed the Ford emblem, were body colored.SES Sport models were available in only Black, Patriot Blue, Matador Red, Silver Frost, and Dark Shadow Gray, while the only interior offered was Dark Charcoal.

For 2004, the Taurus got a new front bumper, headlights, taillights, as well as new wheel options. Inside were a new instrument cluster, steering wheel, as well as the addition of a diagnostic center in the gauge cluster, that would tell if there were any problems with the car, as well as average fuel economy. It also was able to perform a &quot;system check&quot; per request of the driver, to make sure that the engine was functioning properly. 2005 to 2007 models remain mostly unchanged from 2004. In 2006 the Duratec engine was dropped from the lineup.;

=Initial discontinuation=
Image:Ford Taurus (2005) (photograph by Theo, 2006).jpg|thumb|right|2005 Ford Taurus
Taurus sales had slumped significantly in the years prior to its demise, losing significant market share to Japanese sedans.; Production of the Taurus wagon was discontinued in January 2005; sedan retail sales halted after a short 2006 model year. The 2007 Taurus was sold exclusively to fleets in the United States, but was still offered to consumers in Canada. Production ended on October 27, 2006, as Ford idled the Atlanta plant, as part of ''The Way Forward''. The last Ford Taurus rolled off the assembly line around 7:00am,;; destined for delivery to S. Truett Cathy, owner of Chick-fil-A.;; Mr. Cathy's original restaurant was located across from the Ford Atlanta plant. There was no official event or function of any kind to mark the end of production.;;

Rather than investing in an older platform, Ford chose to concentrate on development of the larger 2005 Five Hundred and Freestyle (a taller crossover sedan and wagon, based on a Volvo FWD/AWD platform) and the 2006 Fusion (a Mazda6-based sedan, similar in size to the original Taurus), both vehicles replaced the Taurus in the Ford lineup.

The discontinuation of the Taurus was controversial. While many believed that the Taurus was discontinued because it could no longer compete in the growing sedan market,;; others believed that if Ford wanted to save the car, they could have easily done so.;; One went as far as calling the Taurus the biggest fall from grace in history, and even blamed Ford being in dire straits today on their letting the Taurus become nothing more than a &quot;rental car&quot; and focusing all its money on SUVs.;;

MSNBC interviewed many Ford workers who felt that Ford unjustly abandoned the car that had done so much to revitalize Ford and the US industry. In an October 25, 2006 USA Today editorial, &quot;How Ford starved its Taurus&quot; it was noted that the Japanese stick with their winners and make them better (such as the Toyota Corolla, which has been in continuous production since the 1960s),;; while Detroit retires cars or entire division nameplates to keep with the current trends.;;

Fifth generation (2008-)

| length = 
| width = 
| height = 
| weight = FWD: ;AWD: 
| layout = Front-engine design|Front engine, front-wheel drive / all-wheel drive
| related = Ford Taurus X;Mercury Sable;Lincoln MKS
}}

After Alan Mulally took position as Ford's CEO, rumors were rampant that he was interested in reviving the Taurus. Mulally said that he was baffled by the fact that Ford was going to discontinue the Taurus, and that he believed that the discontinuation of the Taurus was unjust, even asking &quot;How can it go away, it is the best selling car in America.&quot;; He said that the discontinuation of the Taurus disappointed many of Ford's loyal customers, who wanted Ford to instead continue to improve the Taurus instead of abandoning it.; Mulally also stated that under his leadership, Ford will start to remain more loyal to its customers and nameplates, and will continue to stick with and improve successful nameplates to keep customers loyal to the brand, and the revival of the Taurus was the first such move.;;

As a result, the Ford Five Hundred sedan, as produced for the 2005–2007 model year, was scheduled for a significant styling facelift update and power upgrade for the 2008 model year. Ford decided to redesignate that model the Taurus because of customer recognition and dealer demand.;; It was determined that Ford's strategy to redesignate new cars in the lineup with new names beginning with the letter ''F'', as in Ford Focus, Ford Fusion, and Ford Freestyle, was not a good marketing move, as some of the renamed cars had highly recognizable iconic names. The new ''F'' names were not as well known to be associated with Ford in the US, and consumers were confused by the name changes.;;; Mulally believed that the Taurus had an immediately strong brand equity, and that it would take years for consumers to have a similar recognition of the Five Hundred.;;

Changes to the new Taurus from the existing Five Hundred include over 500 changes with the most obvious being a newly styled front end and the addition of the 263&amp;nbsp;hp 3.5&amp;nbsp;L Duratec 35 V6 which replaces the 203&amp;nbsp;hp Duratec 30 3.0&amp;nbsp;L V6. The Five Hundred/Freestyle's ZF-Batavia CVT, which had maximum torque capacity of , is also replaced with a GM-Ford 6-speed automatic transmission|Ford-GM joint venture six-speed automatic capable of withstanding the Duratec 35s additional torque.;; The Taurus sedan twin, the Mercury Sable nameplate, was revived from the Mercury Montego.;;;;;

Ford is currently developing a redesigned Taurus that is to go on sale in 2010.;; This new Taurus is rumored to contain the same dimensions of this model, and that a SHO version will be offered.;

=Ford Taurus X=

Along with the facelifted Five Hundred, Ford also created a facelifted Freestyle model, also in an attempt to improve sagging sales. This model has been rebadged the Taurus X.;; The Taurus X will also drop the CVT transmission and 3.0&amp;nbsp;L V6 used in the Freestyle in favor of the 3.5&amp;nbsp;L engine and six-speed GM-Ford 6-speed automatic transmission|6F automatic. Although this model is considered to be a part of the Taurus line up, it only shares the platform with the Taurus, and does not share any cosmetic parts with the Taurus sedan.

Awards
All 1986 Tauruses came with this sticker on the back window that advertised that it was the 1986 &quot;Car of the Year&quot;.

The Taurus won many awards in its production run, with the original Taurus winning many awards. For 1986, the Taurus was named Motor Trend's Car of the Year. The Motor Trend journalists noted that the Taurus performed much better than the other cars that were up for the award, going as far as saying that the Taurus &quot;Ran away from the competition&quot;.;; The 1986 Taurus also made it onto Car and Driver's ten best list, and the Taurus would stay there every year of its first generation; Team Taurus also won many awards, and would later prove to be an inspirational business development model; In fact, current Ford CEO Alan Mulally claims that Team Taurus was what inspired the development tactics of the Boeing 787.;;

The 1992 Taurus also made it onto Car and Driver's Ten Best list for that year, although that was the last year the Taurus would appear on that list. In its second generation, the Taurus was the best selling car in America every year it was produced.;

The Taurus generally performed well in crash tests, and getting mostly high ratings. The 1996, 2000, and 2008 Taurus earned five-star frontal crash test ratings by NHTSA and were Good in the IIHS offset frontal crash test, and the 2008 was named a Top Safety Pick by IIHS.;; However, NHTSA testing suggests that no Taurus excelled in side-impact protection until the 2008 model.;;;;;;

See also
*List of Ford Taurus models
*List of automobiles by sales

References
*
*
*
*

Notes


External links



*[http://www.fordvehicles.com/Cars/2008taurus/ Official 2008 Ford Taurus Website]
*[http://www.taurusclub.com Taurus Car Club of America]
*[http://www.fordtaurus.net Ford Taurus Specifications &amp; Photos]
*[http://www.shotimes.com SHOTimes.com Taurus SHO information site]
*[http://www.v8sho.com V8SHO - Site dedicated to the 1996&amp;ndash;99 V8 Ford Taurus SHO]
*[http://www.1-87vehicles.org/Reviews/atlas_taurus.php Atlas Taurus history]
*[http://www.fordtaurus.net] (Five Hundred/Taurus Enthusiast Site)



;

Category:Ford vehicles|Taurus
Category:Mid-size cars
Category:Full-size vehicles
Category:Sedans
Category:Station wagons
Category:All wheel drive vehicles
Category:Front wheel drive vehicles
Category:Flexible-fuel vehicles
Category:Goods manufactured in the United States
Category:Motor Trend Car of the Year award winners
Category:1980s automobiles
Category:1990s automobiles
Category:2000s automobiles
Category:Vehicles introduced in 1986

ca:Ford Taurus
de:Ford Taurus
lt:Ford Taurus
pl:Ford Taurus
pt:Ford Taurus