 England
| height = 
| deathdate = 
| deathplace =
| birthname = 
| othername = 
| homepage =
| notable role = Donna in ''EastEnders'';Jane Ford in ''Harbour Lights'';Irma Gobb in ''Mr. Bean'';Ruth in Swiss Toni
}}
Matilda Ziegler ( in German;) (born in 1964) is an English actress. She is known mostly for her work on British television, in particular her roles as Donna Ludlow in BBC's ''EastEnders'' and Ruth in BBC's ''Swiss Toni''. Ziegler is also a veteran theatre actress—she has appeared in many stage productions across the UK. She is married to the actor Louis Hilyer and they have worked together on a number of projects.

Career
Ziegler as Donna in ''EastEnders'' (1988).
One of her first television roles has also been her most notable. She played Donna Ludlow in the BBC soap opera, ''EastEnders'' from 1987-1989. During her time on the show, Ziegler's scheming character contended with prostitution, an attempted gang rape, a heroin addiction and finally suicide (dying of a heroin overdose). The final death scenes of Ziegler's character, who had choked to death on her own vomit, have been hailed as one of the most powerful anti-drug images ever screened on the programme.;;
 
After leaving ''EastEnders'', Ziegler went on to star in the ITV sitcom, ''Mr. Bean'', where she played various characters, notably Irma Gobb, the long-suffering girlfriend of Mr. Bean. She guest starred for four episodes.

Other television credits include ''Harbour Lights'' (1999), acting alongside Nick Berry, who also played her love interest, Simon Wicks, in ''EastEnders''; ''Where the Heart Is'' (2000);''Holby City'' (2003); ''Casualty''; ''An Unsuitable Job for a Woman'' (1998) and the ITV police drama,''The Bill'' (2003), among others.
Ziegler, playing Ruth in the BBC sitcom ''Swiss Toni'' (2003).
Ziegler is more recently known for playing Ruth, the long suffering wife of Toni the car-salesman, in the BBC sitcom, ''Swiss Toni'' (2003-2004). She also appeared in the British Academy Television Award winning drama, ''Sex Traffic'' (2004). In 2005 Ziegler played Christine Marshall in the fourth series of ''The Inspector Lynley Mysteries'' and in 2007 she guest-starred in the BBC medical drama, ''Doctors''. 

Ziegler has appeared in many stage productions, which have included: ''Twelfth Night'' for the Royal Shakespeare Company (2001); the stage production of ''Mr. Bean''; ''Women Laughing'' at the Royal Court Theatre; ''Volpone'', ''Inadmissable Evidence'' and ''Machinal'', all at the National Theatre;''Featuring Loretta'' and ''The Memory Of Water''—both at the Hampstead Theatre. She also starred in Stephen Daldry's award-winning ''An Inspector Calls'', where she played the part of Sheila Birling at the Aldwych Theatre and for the production's Australian tour.;; 

Her radio work has included playing Dr Ruth Anderson in the second and third series of the BBC Radio 4 comedy show, ''Rigor Mortis'' (2004-2006). She took over the role from the actress, Tracy-Ann Oberman, who played Ruth Anderson in the show's first series.

Personal life
Matilda Ziegler is married to the Coventry-born actor, Louis Hilyer. The couple first met while appearing in the stage play ''The Great Pretenders'' in London—directed by ''Billy Elliot'' director Stephen Daldry. Since then they have worked together on a number of projects, including Daldry's award-winning production of ''An Inspector Calls'' and TV series ''Harbour Lights''. They have two daughters, Evie and Faye, and a son, Herbie.;;

References

External links
*


Category:1964 births
Category:Living people
Category:English actors
Category:English soap opera actors
Category:English stage actors
Category:English television actors
Category:German-English people

nl:Matilda Ziegler
fi:Matilda Ziegler
sv:Matilda Ziegler