

Def Leppard are an English hard rock band from Sheffield who formed in 1977 as part of the New Wave of British Heavy Metal. Largely on the strength of their albums ''Pyromania'' and ''Hysteria'' Def Leppard became one of the top-selling rock bands of the 1980s.

Music
The music of Def Leppard is a mixture of hard rock, album-oriented rock (AOR), and heavy metal elements, and has been associated more with the glam metal movement of the 1980s than with the NWOBHM of the late 1970s, in large part due to their mainstream success and production. However, Def Leppard have expressed dislike of the &quot;pop metal&quot; label;http://heavymetalmusic.biz/2007/07/06/def-leppard-craves-respect-in-interview/;

By the release of the ''Hysteria'' album, the band had developed a distinctive sound featuring heavy drums and effects-laden guitar sounds, overlaid with a multi-layered wall of husky, harmonised vocals. Def Leppard is one of only five rock bands with two original albums selling over 10 million copies each in the U.S. The others are The Beatles, Led Zeppelin, Pink Floyd, and Van Halen (some of whom which had more than two).

History
=1977–1979=
Rick Savage (bass), Pete Willis (guitar), and Tony Kenning (drums), all students at Tapton School in Sheffield, formed a band called Atomic Mass in 1977. Following a chance meeting with Willis, Joe Elliott tried out for the band as a guitarist. During his audition, however, it was decided that he was better suited to be lead singer. 

Soon afterward they adopted a name proposed by Elliott, &quot;Deaf Leopard&quot;. At Kenning's suggestion, the spelling was slightly modified in order to make the name seem less like that of apunk band, and perhaps also as an indirect homage to Led Zeppelin.

Having rented a practice space in an old spoon factory on Bramall Lane, Def Leppard added a second guitarist, Steve Clark, in January 1978 and spent the following months developing their sound. In November, just prior to recording sessions for what would be a three-song release known as the ''Def Leppard EP'', Kenning abruptly left the band. He was replaced for those sessions by Frank Noon. By the end of the month Rick Allen, then only 15 years old, had joined the band as its full-time drummer.

Sales of the EP soared after the track &quot;Rocks Off&quot; was given extensive airtime by renowned BBC Radio DJ John Peel, considered at the time to be a champion of punk rock and new wave music. 

Throughout 1979, the band developed a loyal following among British hard rock/heavy metal fans, and were even initially considered the leaders of the New Wave of British Heavy Metal (a status eventually claimed by Iron Maiden). Their growing popularity led to a record deal with the major label Phonogram/Vertigo (Mercury Records in the US).

=1980–1983=
Def Leppard's debut album, ''On Through the Night'', was released on March 14, 1980. Although the album hit the Top 15 in the UK, many early fans were turned off by the perception that the band was trying too hard to appeal to American audiences, with songs like &quot;Hello America&quot; and touring more in the US (supporting Pat Travers, AC/DC, and Ted Nugent). A performance at the Reading Festival in August (Iron Maiden also appeared) was marred when audience members expressed their displeasure by pelting the band with garbage.

The band had by then caught the attention of AC/DC producer Robert John &quot;Mutt&quot; Lange, who agreed to work on their second album, ''High 'n' Dry'', released on July 11, 1981. Lange's legendarily meticulous approach in the studio helped them better realize the potential evident on ''On Through The Night''. 

Despite the album's unimpressive sales figures, the &quot;Bringin' on the Heartbreak&quot; promo clip became one of the first metal videos played on MTV in 1982, bringing the band increased visibility in the States.

Phil Collen, former guitarist with the glam band Girl, replaced Pete Willis, who was fired on July 11, 1982, due to excessive alcohol consumption on the job. (Willis would later resurface with the bands Gogmagog and Roadhouse.) This personnel change took place during the recording of their third release, ''Pyromania'', released on January 20, 1983, and also produced by Lange. 

The lead single, &quot;Photograph&quot;, turned Def Leppard into a household name, supplanting Michael Jackson's &quot;Beat It&quot; as the most requested video clip on MTV, becoming a staple of rock radio (dominating the US Album Rock Charts for six weeks), and hitting #12 on the pop charts.

Fueled by &quot;Photograph&quot; and subsequent singles &quot;Rock of Ages&quot; and &quot;Foolin'&quot;, ''Pyromania'' went on to sell six million copies in 1983, and was held off the top of the US album charts only by Michael Jackson's ''Thriller''. The album has since been certified Diamond by the RIAA in the US, and is considered a classic in both the mainstream rock and heavy metal genres.

Def Leppard's US tour in support of ''Pyromania'' began by opening for Billy Squier in March, and ended with a headlining performance before an audience of 55,000 at Jack Murphy Stadium in San Diego, CA, in September.

As a testament to the band's popularity at the time, a US Gallup poll in 1984 saw Def Leppard voted in as favourite rock band over peers such as the Rolling Stones, AC/DC, and Journey. However, this popularity was not matched in their native England, a fact that greatly bothered them.

=1984–1989=
Following their breakthrough, the band moved to Dublin in February 1984 to begin writing the follow-up to ''Pyromania''.Mutt Lange initially joined in on the songwriting sessions, but then suddenly declined to return as producer due to exhaustion. Instead, Jim Steinman (of Meat Loaf's ''Bat out of Hell'' fame), was brought in.

On December 31 1984, drummer Rick Allen lost his left arm in a car crash on the A57 in the hills outside Sheffield when his speeding Corvette left the road on a sharp bend and went through a drystone wall. Despite the severity of the accident, Rick was committed to continuing his role as Def Leppard's drummer. He practiced drumming with pillows, and realised that he could use his legs to do some of the drumming work previously done with his arms. He then worked with Simmons to design a custom electronic drum kit. 

The other members of the band fully stood behind Rick's determination and never sought a replacement. During his recovery, Mutt Lange eventually returned to the fold as producer, and Rick's triumphant comeback was sealed at the 1986 Donington Monsters of Rock festival, with an emotionally charged ovation after his introduction by Joe Elliott. 

Def Leppard's fourth album, ''Hysteria'', was finally released on August 3, 1987. 
The second single from the album, &quot;Animal&quot;, reached #6 in the UK and finally turned the band into stars in their home country. ''Hysteria'' immediately topped the charts in its first week of release.

US album sales were relatively slow (compared to ''Pyromania'') until the fourth single, &quot;Pour Some Sugar On Me&quot;. The song hit Number 2, and ''Hysteria'' finally reached the top of the US Album Charts in July 1988. In October, the power ballad &quot;Love Bites&quot; would become Def Leppard's first (and only) Number One single on the Billboard Hot 100, and in January 1989 the band scored another US Top 5 hit with &quot;Armageddon It&quot;.

''Hysteria'' is one of only a handful of albums (and the third in rock history) that has charted seven singles or more on the US Hot 100: &quot;Women&quot; (#80), &quot;Animal&quot; (#19), &quot;Hysteria&quot; (#10), &quot;Pour Some Sugar On Me&quot; (#2), &quot;Love Bites&quot; (#1), &quot;Armageddon It&quot; (#3) and &quot;Rocket&quot; (#12). It remained on the charts for three years and has sold 18 million copies worldwide.

Equally as successful was the accompanying ''Hysteria'' world tour which ran for 15 months and saw Def Leppard perform &quot;In The Round&quot;. The concept proved wildly popular with fans, as evidenced in the videos for &quot;Pour Some Sugar On Me&quot; and &quot;Armageddon It&quot; (and was later used again for the ''Adrenalize'' tour).

In 1989 Def Leppard won Favourite Heavy Metal Artist as well as Favourite Heavy Metal Album (for &quot;Hysteria&quot;) during the American Music Awards. It was the first time that a heavy metal category was added to the awards show. (The category has since been deleted in recent years)

By the end of the decade, although Guns N' Roses, Mötley Crüe, and Bon Jovi garnered more mainstream exposure, Def Leppard had sold more records than those rock bands in the US.

=1990–1999=
Following ''Hysterias mammoth success, the band quickly set out to work on their fifth album, hoping to avoid another lengthy gap. However, Steve Clark's alcoholism issues worsened to the point where he was constantly in and out of rehab. Recording sessions suffered from this distraction, and in mid-1990 Steve was granted a six-month leave of absence from the band. 

Clark never reached the end of his leave, dying from an accidental mix of prescription drugs and alcohol on January 8 1991 in his London home. The remaining band members decided to carry on and recorded of the album as a four-piece, with Phil mimicking Steve's style on his intended guitar parts. 

Def Leppard's fifth album ''Adrenalize'' was finally released on March 31 1992. The album simultaneously entered at Number One on both the UK and US album charts, staying there for 5 weeks on the latter. The first single, &quot;Let's Get Rocked&quot;, was an instant smash hit and its video was later nominated for Best Video of the Year at the 1992 MTV Video Music Awards.

In April 1992, guitarist Vivian Campbell (formerly of Dio and Whitesnake) joined Def Leppard, making his official live debut with his band at the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert. ''Adrenalize'' yielded six hit singles and sold 7 million copies worldwide. Another successful world tour followed, but the band's fortunes began to be affected by the rise of grunge and alternative rock.

A collection of b-sides and unreleased tracks recorded between 1984 and 1993, ''Retro Active'', was released in October 1993, preceded by the success of &quot;Two Steps Behind&quot; (from the Arnold Schwarzenegger film Last Action Hero). Another single, &quot;Miss You In A Heartbeat&quot;, hit the Top 5 in Canada, becoming one of their biggest hits there. Retro Active has sold 3 million copies worldwide to date.

Two years later, Def Leppard issued their first greatest hits collection, ''Vault: Def Leppard's Greatest Hits (1980–1995)'', which has sold 8 million copies worldwide. Alternate track listings of the album were issued for North America, the UK and Japan. 

The compilation included a new track, the ballad &quot;When Love &amp; Hate Collide&quot;, which became their biggest ever hit in the UK, hitting #2. It peaked at #58 in the U.S. On October 23, 1995, the band entered the Guinness Book of World Records by performing three concerts in three continents in one day (Tangiers, Morocco, London, England, and Vancouver, Canada).

Slang, released in May 1996, marked a drastic musical departure for the band by featuring darker lyrics and a stripped-down alternative rock edge. The US audience reception for Slang and its subsequent tour was a major dropoff from a decade earlier, but Q Magazine would nonetheless list Slang as one of the Top Ten Albums of 1996.

VH1 revived the band's fortunes in the US in 1998 by featuring them on one of the first episodes of ''Behind The Music''. Reruns of the episode yielded some of the series' highest ratings, and brought the band's music back into the public consciousness (following years of burial by the alternative rock climate). The episode was even parodied on ''Saturday Night Live''.

In an effort to capitalize on this new momentum, Def Leppard returned to its classic sound with the 1999 album ''Euphoria''. The first single, &quot;Promises&quot;, reunited the band with Mutt Lange, and hit the US Mainstream Rock charts for 3 weeks. The album was certified for gold sales in the United States and Canada.

=2000–Present=
On September 5, 2000, Def Leppard were inducted into the Rock Walk of Fame, on Hollywood's Sunset Boulevard by their friend Brian May of Queen.

In 2001 VH1 produced and aired ''Hysteria - The Def Leppard Story'', a biopic that included Anthony Michael Hall as Mutt Lange and Amber Valletta as Lorelei Shellist (Steve Clark's girlfriend). The docudrama covered the band's history between 1977 through 1986, recounting the trials and triumphs of Rick Allen and Steve Clark. The July 18 broadcast still produced some of the channel's highest-ever ratings and is available on DVD.

A side project at the time consisted of Joe Elliott and Phil Collen teaming up with members of the Spiders From Mars (David Bowie's former band), minus the late Mick Ronson, naming themselves the Cybernauts. The group played several shows, covering Bowie's Ziggy Stardust-era songs.

Def Leppard's tenth album, simply titled &quot;''X''&quot;, was released in July 2002. It saw the band's musical direction moving more towards pop and further away from the band's hard rock roots. In fact, some tracks were produced by the hit factory behind Britney Spears and the Backstreet Boys.

Although greeted with generally positive reviews, ''X'' quickly disappeared from the charts, ultimately becoming the band's least successful release. However, the accompanying tour played to the band's strongest audiences since ''Adrenalize''.

An expanded and updated best-of collection, ''Best Of'', was released in October 2004 internationally. The North America-only version, ''Rock Of Ages - The Definitive Collection'', was released the following May. Def Leppard would participate at the Live 8 show in Philadelphia, and toured in the summer with Bryan Adams. 2005 also saw the band leave their longtime management team, Q-Prime and sign with HK Management.

On May 23 2006, Def Leppard released an all-covers album titled ''Yeah! (album)|Yeah!''. The disc pays homage to classic rock songs of their childhood, originally recorded by David Bowie, The Kinks,Blondie, and Badfinger among others. It debuted at #16 in the US, their tenth consecutive Top 20 album and has scanned more than 140,000 copies to date.

The band, along with Queen, Kiss, and Judas Priest, were the inaugural inductees of &quot;VH1 Rock Honors&quot; on May 31, 2006. During the show, The All-American Rejects paid homage to the band with a cover of &quot;Photograph&quot;. Soon afterwards, they embarked on a successful US tour with Journey. That October, ''Hysteria'' was re-released in a two-disc deluxe edition format, which combined the original album, remastered for the first time, with b-sides, remixes and bonus tracks from single releases.

Def Leppard began their latest tour, the 52-date &quot;Downstage Thrust Tour,&quot; on June 29, which took them across the US and Canada. Support bands were Foreigner and Styx ). The band's upcoming album is tentatively titled ''Songs From The Sparkle Lounge'' and is scheduled for release in early 2008.

The first few dates of Def Leppard's 2008 tour were confirmed on the band's official website on December 12, 2007.;http://www.defleppard.com/tour/tour_2008.asp;

 ;
Image:SavageCollen.JPG
Image:CollenCampbell.JPG
Image:DefLeppard2.JPG
Image:Defleppardconcert.jpg|Promo poster from 2007 tour
;

Band members

=Current members=
*Joe Elliott - lead vocals, keyboards, additional guitar (1977–present)
*Phil Collen - guitar, vocals (1982–present)
*Vivian Campbell - guitar, backing vocals (1992–present)
*Rick Savage - bass, keyboards, vocals (1977–present)
*Rick Allen - drums, percussion, backing vocals (1978–present)

=Former members=
*Steve Clark - guitar, backing vocals (1978–1991)
*Pete Willis - guitar, backing vocals (1977–1982)
*Tony Kenning - drums, percussion (1977–1978)
*Frank Noon - drums, percussion (1978)

=Touring musicians=
*Jeff Rich - drums, percussion (August 1986 - supplement to Rick Allen)

Side projects

Phil Collen played guitar, uncredited, on Sam Kinison's &quot;Wild Thing&quot; from 1988. The video featured members of Poison, Bon Jovi, Mötley Crüe, Guns N' Roses, Ratt, and Aerosmith.

Collen also produced and played on the 1991 album ''On The Edge'' from Australian band BB Steal.

Joe Elliott sang lead vocals on two tracks on Rolling Stones guitarist Ron Wood's 1992 solo album, ''Slide On This''. His then-wife Karla appeared in the video for &quot;Always Wanted More&quot;.

Various members of Def Leppard have played on tribute records for Jeff Beck, AC/DC and Alice Cooper.

Joe Elliott performed on two tracks to the soundtrack of the 1996 Sheffield-set motion picture, ''When Saturday Comes'', the title track and an instrumental, &quot;Jimmy's Theme&quot;.

Phil Collen has a side band called Man-Raze, which is set to release its debut album September 2007.

Vivian Campbell joined former Foreigner vocalist Lou Gramm and bassist Bruce Turgon on the one-album project ''Shadow King'', in 1991.

Vivian Campbell has played with two side bands in recent years, Clock and the Riverdogs, and recorded a solo album, ''Two Sides of If'', released in 2005.

Discography


See also
*List of best-selling music artists
*List of best-selling albums worldwide
*List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Mainstream Rock chart
*Terror Twins - Steve Clark and Phil Collen 

Notes


External links
*[http://www.defleppard.com Def Leppard Official site]
*[http://www.myspace.com/defleppard Def Leppard MySpace]
*[http://www.sheffield.gov.uk/out--about/tourist-information/visitor-attractions/sheffield-legends/def-leppard Def Leppard @ Sheffield Walk of Fame]
*

;


Category:Def Leppard| 
Category:English rock music groups
Category:1980s music groups
Category:Music from Sheffield
Category:Musical groups established in 1977
Category:British heavy metal musical groups
Category:Quintets
Category:Glam metal groups

bg:Деф Лепард
cs:Def Leppard
da:Def Leppard
de:Def Leppard
et:Def Leppard
es:Def Leppard
fr:Def Leppard
ko:데프 레파드
id:Def Leppard
it:Def Leppard
he:דף לפרד
lt:Def Leppard
nl:Def Leppard
ja:デフ・レパード
no:Def Leppard
pl:Def Leppard
pt:Def Leppard
ro:Def Leppard
ru:Def Leppard
simple:Def Leppard
sl:Def Leppard
fi:Def Leppard
sv:Def Leppard
th:เดฟ เล็พพาร์ด‎
vi:Def Leppard