


Archimedes of Syracuse (Greek: ) (''c''. 287&amp;nbsp;BC &amp;ndash; ''c.'' 212&amp;nbsp;BC) was an ancient Greek mathematician, physicist, astronomer and engineer. Although little is known of his life, he is regarded as one of the leading scientists in classical antiquity. Among his advances in physics are the foundations of hydrostatics and the explanation of the principle of the lever.
His early use of calculus included the first known summation of an infinite series with a method that is still used today.;; He is also credited with designing innovative machines, including weapons and the screw pump that bears his name. He is best known for allegedly exclaiming &quot;Eureka!&quot; after discovering what is known today as Archimedes' principle.

Archimedes died during the Siege of Syracuse, when he was killed by a Roman soldier despite orders that he should not be harmed.At his request his tombstone was carved with a sphere contained within a cylinder and inscribed with the ratio of the cylinder's volume to that of the sphere. Archimedes considered the discovery of this ratio the greatest of all his accomplishments. The relatively few copies of his treatises that survived through the Middle Ages were an influential source of ideas for scientists during the Renaissance.;;
The historians of Ancient Rome showed a strong interest in Archimedes and wrote accounts of his life and works, while the discovery of previously unknown works by Archimedes in the Archimedes Palimpsest has provided new insights into how he obtained mathematical results.;;

Carl Friedrich Gauss is said to have remarked that Archimedes was one of the threemathematicians, with the others being Sir Isaac Newton and Ferdinand Eisenstein.;; 

Biography
This bronze statue of Archimedes is at the Archenhold Observatory in Berlin. It was sculpted by Gerhard Thieme and unveiled in 1972.
Archimedes was born ''c''. 287&amp;nbsp;BC in the seaport city of Syracuse, Sicily, at that time a colony of Magna Graecia. The date of birth is based on an assertion by the Byzantine Greek historian John Tzetzes that Archimedes lived for 75 years.;T. L. Heath, ''Works of Archimedes'', 1897; In ''The Sand Reckoner'', Archimedes gives his father's name as Phidias, an astronomer about whom nothing is known. Plutarch wrote in his ''Parallel Lives'' that Archimedes was related to King Hiero II, the ruler of Syracuse.;; A biography of Archimedes was written by his friend Heracleides but this work has been lost, leaving the details of his life obscure.;; It is unknown, for instance, whether he ever married or had children. Archimedes probably spent part of his youth in Alexandria, Egypt, where Conon of Samos and Eratosthenes of Cyrene were contemporaries. He referred to Conon of Samos as his friend, while two of his works (''The Sand Reckoner'' and the ''Cattle Problem'') have introductions addressed to Eratosthenes.

Archimedes died ''c''. 212 BC during the Second Punic War, when Roman forces under General Marcus Claudius Marcellus captured the city of Syracuse after a two year long siege. According to the popular account given by Plutarch, Archimedes was contemplating a mathematical diagram when the city was captured. A Roman soldier commanded him to come and meet General Marcellus but he declined, saying that he had to finish working on the problem. The soldier was enraged by this, and killed Archimedes with his sword. Plutarch also gives aaccount of the death of Archimedes which suggests that he may have been killed while attempting to surrender to a Roman soldier. According to this story, Archimedes was carrying mathematical instruments, and was killed because the soldier thought that they were valuable items. General Marcellus was reportedly angered by the death of Archimedes, as he had ordered him not to be harmed.;;

The last words attributed to Archimedes are &quot;Do not disturb my circles&quot; (Greek: μή μου τούς κύκλους τάραττε), a reference to the circles in the mathematical drawing that he was supposedly studying when disturbed by the Roman soldier. This quote is often given in Latin as &quot;Noli turbare circulos meos&quot;, but there is no reliable evidence that Archimedes uttered these words and they do not appear in the account given by Plutarch.;;


The sphere has 2/3 the surface area and volume of the circumscribing cylinder. A sphere and cylinder were carved on the tomb of Archimedes at his request.
The tomb of Archimedes had a carving of his favorite mathematical diagram, which was a sphere inside a cylinder of the same height and diameter. Archimedes had proved that the volume and surface area of the sphere would be two thirds that of the cylinder. In 75 BC, 137 years after his death, the Roman orator Cicero was serving as quaestor in Sicily. He had heard stories about the tomb of Archimedes, but none of the locals was able to give him the location. Eventually he found the tomb near the Agrigentine gate in Syracuse, in a neglected condition and overgrown with bushes. Cicero had the tomb cleaned up, and was able to see the carving and read some of the verses that had been added as an inscription.;;

The standard versions of the life of Archimedes were written long after his death by the historians of Ancient Rome. The account of the siege of Syracuse given by Polybius in his ''Universal History'' was written around seventy years after Archimedes' death, and was used subsequently as a source by Plutarch and Livy. It sheds little light on Archimedes as a person, and focuses on the war machines that he is said to have built in order to defend the city.;;

Discoveries and inventions
The most commonly related anecdote about Archimedes tells how he invented a method for measuring the volume of an object with an irregular shape. According to Vitruvius, a new crown in the shape of a laurel wreath had been made for King Hiero II, and Archimedes was asked to determine whether it was of solid gold, or whether silver had been added by a dishonest goldsmith.;; Archimedes had to solve the problem without damaging the crown, so he could not melt it down in order to measure its density as a cube, which would have been the simplest solution. While taking a bath, he noticed that the level of the water rose as he got in. He realized that this effect could be used to determine the volume of the crown, and therefore its density after weighing it. The density of the crown would be lower if cheaper and less dense metals had been added. He then took to the streets naked, so excited by his discovery that he had forgotten to dress, crying &quot;Eureka!&quot; &quot;I have found it!&quot; (Greek: &quot;εύρηκα!&quot;);;

The story about the golden crown does not appear in the known works of Archimedes, but in his treatise ''On Floating Bodies'' he gives the principle known in hydrostatics as Archimedes' Principle. This states that a body immersed in a fluid experiences a buoyant force equal to the weight of the displaced fluid.;;

While Archimedes did not invent the lever, he wrote the earliest known rigorous explanation of the principle involved. According to Pappus of Alexandria, his work on levers caused him to remark: &quot;Give me a place to stand on, and I will move the Earth.&quot; (Greek: &quot;δος μοι πα στω και ταν γαν κινάσω&quot;);Quoted by Pappus of Alexandria in ''Synagoge'', Book VIII; Plutarch describes how Archimedes designed block and tackle pulley systems, allowing sailors to use the principle of leverage to lift objects that would otherwise have been too heavy to move.;;
The Archimedes' screw was operated by hand and could raise water efficiently.
A large part of Archimedes' work in engineering arose from fulfilling the needs of his home city of Syracuse. The Greek writer Athenaeus of Naucratis described how King Hieron II commissioned Archimedes to design a huge ship, the ''Syracusia'', which could be used for luxury travel, carrying supplies, and as a naval warship. The ''Syracusia'' is said to have been the largest ship built in classical antiquity.;; According to Athenaeus, it was capable of carrying 600 people and included garden decorations, a gymnasium and a temple dedicated to the goddess Aphrodite among its facilities. Since a ship of this size would leak a considerable amount of water through the hull, the Archimedes' screw was purportedly developed in order to remove the bilge water. The screw was a machine with a revolving screw shaped blade inside a cylinder. It was turned by hand, and could also be used to transfer water from abody of water into irrigation canals. Versions of the Archimedes' screw are still in use today in developing countries. The Archimedes' screw described in Roman times by Vitruvius may have been an improvement on a screw pump that was used to irrigate the Hanging Gardens of Babylon.;;;;;;

The Claw of Archimedes is another weapon that he is said to have designed in order to defend the city of Syracuse. Also known as &quot;the ship shaker&quot;, the claw consisted of a crane-like arm from which a large metal grappling hook was suspended. When the claw was dropped on to an attacking ship the arm would swing upwards, lifting the ship out of the water and possibly sinking it. There have been modern experiments to test the feasibility of the claw, and in 2005 a television documentary entitled ''Superweapons of the Ancient World'' built a version of the claw and concluded that it was a workable device.;;;;

Archimedes has also been credited with improving the power and accuracy of the catapult, and with inventing the odometer during the First Punic War. The odometer was described as a cart with a gear mechanism that dropped a ball into a container after each mile traveled.;;

Cicero (106&amp;nbsp;BC&amp;ndash;43&amp;nbsp;BC) mentions Archimedes briefly in his dialogue ''De re publica'', which portrays a fictional conversation taking place in 129&amp;nbsp;BC. After the capture of Syracuse ''c.'' 212&amp;nbsp;BC, General Marcus Claudius Marcellus is said to have taken back to Rome two mechanisms used as aids in astronomy, which showed the motion of the Sun, Moon and five planets.Cicero mentions similar mechanisms designed by Thales of Miletus and Eudoxus of Cnidus. The dialogue says that Marcellus kept one of the devices as his only personal loot from Syracuse, and donated the other to the Temple of Virtue in Rome. Marcellus' mechanism was demonstrated, according to Cicero, by Gaius Sulpicius Gallus to Lucius Furius Philus, who described it thus: 

;;;}} 

This is a description of a planetarium or orrery. Pappus of Alexandria stated that Archimedes had written a manuscript (now lost) on the construction of these mechanisms entitled . Modern research in this area has been focused on the Antikythera mechanism, another device from classical antiquity that was probably designed for the same purpose. Constructing mechanisms of this kind would have required a sophisticated knowledge of differential gearing. This was once thought to have been beyond the range of the technology available in ancient times, but the discovery of the Antikythera mechanism in 1902 has confirmed that devices of this kind were known to the ancient Greeks.;;;;

=&quot;Death ray&quot;=
Archimedes may have used mirrors acting as a parabolic reflector to burn ships attacking Syracuse
Lucian wrote that during the Siege of Syracuse (''c.'' 214&amp;ndash;212&amp;nbsp;BC), Archimedes repelled an attack by Roman forces with a burning glass.;''Hippias'', C.2.; The device was used to focus sunlight on to the approaching ships, causing them to catch fire. This claim, sometimes called the &quot;Archimedes death ray&quot;, has been the subject of ongoing debate about its credibility since the Renaissance. René Descartes rejected it as false, while modern researchers have attempted to recreate the effect using only the means that would have been available to Archimedes.;;
It has been suggested that a large array of highly polished bronze or copper shields acting as mirrors could have been employed to focus sunlight on to a ship. This would have used the principle of the parabolic reflector in a manner similar to a solar furnace.

In October 2005 a group of students from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology carried out an experiment with 127 one-foot (30&amp;nbsp;cm) square mirror tiles, focused on awooden ship at a range of around 100&amp;nbsp;feet (30&amp;nbsp;m). Flames broke out on a patch of the ship, but only after the sky had been cloudless and the ship had remained stationary for around ten minutes. It was concluded that the weapon was a feasible device under these conditions. The MIT group repeated the experiment for the television show ''MythBusters'', using a wooden fishing boat in San Francisco as the target. Again some charring occurred, along with a small amount of flame. In order to catch fire, wood needs to reach its flash point, which is around 300 degrees Celsius (570 °F), and this is hotter than the maximum temperature produced by a domestic oven.;;
When ''Mythbusters'' broadcast the result of the San Francisco experiment in January 2006, the claim was placed in the category of &quot;busted&quot; (or &quot;failed&quot;) due to of the length of time and ideal weather conditions required for combustion to occur.;;
 
A similar test of the &quot;Archimedes death ray&quot; was carried out in 1973 by the Greek scientist Ioannis Sakkas. The experiment took place at the Skaramagas naval base outside Athens. On this occasion 70 mirrors were used, each with a copper coating and a size of around five by three feet (1.5 by 1&amp;nbsp;m). The mirrors were pointed at a plywood of a Roman warship at a distance of around 160&amp;nbsp;feet (50&amp;nbsp;m). When the mirrors were focused accurately, the ship burst into flames within a few seconds. The plywood ship had a coating of tar paint, which is flammable and may have aided combustion.;;

Mathematics
While he is often regarded as a designer of mechanical devices, Archimedes also made contributions to the field of mathematics. Plutarch wrote: “He placed his whole affection and ambition in those purer speculations where there can be no reference to the vulgar needs of life.”;;
Archimedes used the method of exhaustion to approximate the value of π.
Archimedes was able to use infinitesimals in a way that is similar to modern integral calculus. By assuming a proposition to be true and showing that this would lead to a contradiction, he could give answers to problems to an arbitrary degree of accuracy, while specifying the limits within which the answer lay. This technique is known as the method of exhaustion, and he employed it to approximate the value of π (Pi). He did this by drawing a larger polygon outside a circle and a smaller polygon inside the circle. As the number of sides of the polygon increases, it becomes a more accurate approximation of a circle. When the polygons had 96 sides each, he calculated the lengths of their sides and showed that the value of π lay between(approximately 3.1429) and(approximately 3.1408). He also proved that the area of a circle was equal to π multiplied by the square of the radius of the circle.

In ''The Measurement of a Circle'', Archimedes gives the value of the square root of 3 as being more than(approximately 1.732) and less than(approximately 1.7320512). The actual value is around 1.7320508076, making this a very accurate estimate. He introduced this result without offering any explanation of the method used to obtain it. This aspect of the work of Archimedes caused John Wallis to remark that he was: &quot;as it were of set purpose to have covered up the traces of his investigation as if he had grudged posterity the secret of his method of inquiry while he wished to extort from them assent to his results.&quot;;Quoted in T. L. Heath, ''Works of Archimedes'', Dover Publications, ISBN 0-486-42084-1.;
;Image:Parabola-and-inscribed triangle text.png;;
In ''The Quadrature of the Parabola'', Archimedes proved that the area enclosed by a parabola and a straight line is 4/3 multiplied by the area of a triangle with equal base and height.He expressed the solution to the problem as a geometric series that summed to infinity with the ratio :

:;\sum_{n=0}^\infty 4^{-n} = 1 + 4^{-1} + 4^{-2} + 4^{-3} + \cdots = {4\over 3}. \;;

If the first term in this series is the area of the triangle, then the second is the sum of the areas of two triangles whose bases are the two smaller secant lines, and so on. This proof is a variation of the infinite serieswhich sums to .

In ''The Sand Reckoner'', Archimedes set out to calculate the number of grains of sand that the universe could contain. In doing so, he challenged the notion that the number of grains of sand was too large to be counted. He wrote: &quot;There are some, King Gelo (Gelo II, son of Hiero II), who think that the number of the sand is infinite in multitude; and I mean by the sand not only that which exists about Syracuse and the rest of Sicily but also that which is found in every region whether inhabited or uninhabited.&quot; To solve the problem, Archimedes devised a system of counting based around the myriad. The word is based on the Greek for uncountable, ''murious'', and was also used to denote the number 10,000. He proposed a number system using powers of myriad myriads (100 million) and concluded that the number of grains of sand required to fill the universe would be 8 in modern notation.;;

Writings
Image:Archimedes lever (Small).jpg|thumb|right|Archimedes is said to have remarked about the lever: &quot;Give me a place to stand on, and I will move the Earth.&quot;
* ''On the Equilibrium of Planes'' (two volumes)
: The first book is in fifteen propositions with seven postulates, while the second book is in ten propositions. In this work Archimedes explains the ''Law of the Lever'', stating:



:Archimedes uses the principles derived to calculate the areas and centers of gravity of various geometric figures including triangles, paraboloids, and hemispheres.;;
* ''On the Measurement of the Circle''
:This is a short work consisting of three propositions. It is written in the form of a correspondence with Dositheus of Pelusium, who was a student of Conon of Samos. In Proposition II, Archimedes shows that the value of π (Pi) is greater thanand less than . The latter figure was used as an approximation of π throughout the Middle Ages and is still used today when a rough figure is required.
* ''On Spirals''
:This work of 28 propositions is also addressed to Dositheus. The treatise defines what is now called the Archimedean spiral. It is the locus of points corresponding to the locations over time of a point moving away from a fixed point with a constant speed along a line which rotates with constant angular velocity. Equivalently, in polar coordinates (''r'', &amp;theta;) it can be described by the equation

::;\, r=a+b\theta;

:with real numbers ''a'' and ''b''. This is an early example of a mechanical curve (a curve traced by a moving point) considered by a Greek mathematician. 
* ''On the Sphere and the Cylinder'' (two volumes)
:In this treatise addressed to Dositheus, Archimedes obtains the result of which he was most proud, namely the relationship between a sphere and a circumscribed cylinder of the same height and diameter. The volume is 4/3πr³ for the sphere, and 2πr³ for the cylinder; the surface area is 4πr² for the sphere, and 6πr² for the cylinder, where r is the radius. The sphere will have two thirds of the volume and surface area of the cylinder. A carving of this proof was used on the tomb of Archimedes at his request.
* ''On Conoids and Spheroids''
:This is a work in 32 propositions addressed to Dositheus. In this treatise Archimedes calculates the areas and volumes of sections of cones, spheres, and paraboloids. 
* ''On Floating Bodies'' (two volumes)
:In the first part of this treatise, Archimedes spells out the law of wikt:equilibrium|equilibrium of fluids, and proves that water will adopt a spherical form around a center of gravity. This may have been an attempt at explaining the theory of contemporary Greek astronomers such as Eratosthenes that the Earth is round. The fluids described by Archimedes are not , since he assumes the existence of a point towards which all things fall in order to derive the spherical shape. 
Archimedes is commemorated on a Greek postage stamp from 1983.
:In the second part, he calculates the equilibrium positions of sections of paraboloids. This was probably an idealization of the shapes of ships' hulls. Some of his sections float with the base under water and the summit above water, similar to the way that icebergs float. Archimedes' principle of buoyancy is given in the work, stated as follows: 
* ''The Quadrature of the Parabola''
:A work of 24 propositions addressed to Dositheus. In this treatise Archimedes proves by two methods that the area enclosed by a parabola and a straight line is 4/3 multiplied by the area of a triangle with equal base and height. He achieves this by calculating the value of a geometric series that sums to infinity with the ratio .
* ''Stomachion''
:This is a dissection puzzle similar to a Tangram, and the treatise describing it was found in more complete form in the Archimedes Palimpsest. Archimedes calculates the areas of the 14 pieces which can be assembled to form a square. Research published by Dr. Reviel Netz of Stanford University in 2003 argued that Archimedes was attempting to determine how many ways the pieces of paper could be assembled into the shape of a square. The figure given by Dr. Netz is that the pieces can be made into a square in 17,152 ways. The number of arrangements is 536 when solutions that are equivalent by rotation and reflection have been excluded. The ''Stomachion'' represents an example of an early problem in combinatorics. ''Stomachion'' is the Greek word for stomach, στομάχιον; the reason for the name is unknown.;;;;
* ''Archimedes' Cattle Problem''
:This work was discovered by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing in a Greek manuscript consisting of a poem of 44 lines, in the Herzog August Library in Wolfenbüttel, Germany in 1773. It is addressed to Eratosthenes and the mathematicians at the University of Alexandria. Archimedes challenges them to count the numbers of cattle in the Herd of the Sun by solving a number of simultaneous Diophantine equations. There is a more difficult version of the problem in which some of the answers are required to be square numbers. This version of the problem was first solved by a computer in 1965, and the answer is a very large number, approximately 7.760271.;;
* ''The Sand Reckoner''
:In this treatise, Archimedes counts the number of grains of sand that will fit inside the universe. This book mentions the heliocentric theory of the solar system proposed by Aristarchus of Samos, contemporary ideas about the size of the Earth and the distance between various celestial bodies. By using a system of numbers based on powers of the myriad, Archimedes concludes that the number of grains of sand required to fill the universe is 8 in modern notation. The introductory letter states that Archimedes' father was an astronomer named Phidias. ''The Sand Reckoner'' or ''Psammites'' is the only surviving work in which Archimedes discusses his views on astronomy.;;
* ''The Method of Mechanical Theorems''
:This treatise was thought lost until the discovery of the Archimedes Palimpsest in 1906. In this work Archimedes uses infinitesimals, and shows how breaking up a figure into an infinite number of infinitely small parts can be used to determine its area or volume. Archimedes may have considered this method lacking in formal rigor, so he also used the method of exhaustion to derive the results. As with ''The Cattle Problem'', ''The Method of Mechanical Theorems'' was written in the form of a letter to Eratosthenes in Alexandria.

=Apocryphal works=
''Archimedes' Book of Lemmas'' or ''Liber Assumptorum'' is a treatise with fifteen propositions on the nature of circles. The earliest known copy of the text is in Arabic. The scholars T. L. Heath and Marshall Clagett argued that it cannot have been written by Archimedes in its current form, since it quotes Archimedes, suggesting modification by another author. The ''Lemmas'' may be based on an earlier work by Archimedes that is now lost.;;

It has also been claimed by the Arab scholar Abu'l Raihan Muhammed al-Biruni that Heron's formula for calculating the area of a triangle from the length of its sides was known to Archimedes. However, the first reliable reference to the formula is given by Heron of Alexandria in the 1st century&amp;nbsp; AD.;;

Archimedes Palimpsest
''Stomachion'' is a dissection puzzle in the Archimedes Palimpsest

The written work of Archimedes has not survived as well as that of Euclid, and seven of his treatises are known to exist only through references made to them by other authors. Pappus of Alexandria mentions ''On Sphere-Making'' and another work on polyhedra, while Theon of Alexandria quotes a remark about refraction from the''Catoptrica''. The writings of Archimedes were collected by the Byzantine architect Isidore of Miletus (''c''. 530&amp;nbsp;AD), while translations into Arabic and Latin made during the Middle Ages helped to keep his work alive. Archimedes' work was translated into Arabic by Thābit ibn Qurra (836&amp;ndash;901&amp;nbsp;AD), and Latin by Gerard of Cremona (''c.'' 1114&amp;ndash;1187&amp;nbsp;AD). During the Renaissance, the ''Editio Princeps'' (First Edition) was published in Basel in 1544 by Johann Herwagen with the works of Archimedes in Greek and Latin.;; Around the year 1586 Galileo Galilei invented a hydrostatic balance for weighing metals in air and water after apparently being inspired by the work of Archimedes.;;

The foremost document containing the work of Archimedes is the Archimedes Palimpsest. A palimpsest, from the Greek word ''palimpsestos'' meaning &quot;scraped again&quot;, is a manuscript written on parchment that has another text written over it, leaving two (or more) layers of visible writing. Palimpsests were common in antiquity because parchment was scarce and costly. As certain kinds of texts went in and out of literary fashion the manuscripts were recycled and reused, with their original content being rubbed away and overwritten.In 1906, the Danish professor Johan Ludvig Heiberg (1854-1928)|Johan Ludvig Heiberg realized that a goatskin parchment of prayers written in the 13th century AD also carried an older work written in the 10th century AD, which he identified as previously unknown copies of works by Archimedes. The parchment spent hundreds of years in a monastery library in Constantinople before being sold to a private collector in the 1920s. On October 29, 1998 it was sold at auction to an anonymous buyer for $2 million at Christie's in London. The palimpsest holds seven treatises, including the only surviving copy of ''On Floating Bodies'' in the original Greek. It is the only known source of the ''Method of Mechanical Theorems'', referred to by Suidas and thought to have been lost forever. ''Stomachion'' was also discovered in the palimpsest, with a more complete analysis of the puzzle than had been found in previous texts. The palimpsest is now stored at the Walters Art Museum in Baltimore, Maryland, where it has been subjected to a range of modern tests including the use of ultraviolet andlight to read the overwritten text.;;

The treatises in the Archimedes Palimpsest are: ''On the Equilibrium of Planes, On Spirals, The Measurement of the Circle, On the Sphere and the Cylinder, On Floating Bodies, The Method of Mechanical Theorems'' and ''Stomachion''.

Legacy
The Fields Medal carries a portrait of Archimedes.
There is a crater on the Moon named Archimedes (29.7° N, 4.0° W) in his honor, and a lunar mountain range, the Montes Archimedes (25.3° N, 4.6° W).;;
The asteroid 3600 Archimedes is named after him.;; 

The Fields Medal for outstanding achievement in mathematics carries a portrait of Archimedes, along with his proof concerning the sphere and the cylinder. The inscription around the head of Archimedes is a quote attributed to him which reads in Latin: &quot;Transire suum pectus mundoque potiri&quot; (Rise above oneself and grasp the world).;; 

Archimedes has appeared on postage stamps issued by East Germany (1973), Greece (1983), Italy (1983), Nicaragua (1971), San Marino (1982) and Spain (1963).;; 

The exclamation of Eureka! attributed to Archimedes is the state motto of California. In this instance the word refers to the discovery of gold near Sutter's Mill in 1848 which sparked the California gold rush.;;

See also
;
* Archimedes' axiom
* Archimedes number
* Archimedes paradox
* Archimedean property
* Archimedean solid
* Archimedes' use of infinitesimals
* Methods of computing square roots
* Zhang Heng
;

Notes and references
=Notes=
a. In the preface to ''On Spirals'' addressed to Dositheus of Pelusium, Archimedes says that &quot;many years have elapsed since Conon's death.&quot; Conon of Samos lived , suggesting that Archimedes may have been an older man when writing some of his works.

b. The treatises by Archimedes known to exist only through references in the works of other authors are: ''On Sphere-Making'' and a work on polyhedra mentioned by Pappus of Alexandria; ''Catoptrica'', a work on optics mentioned by Theon of Alexandria; ''Principles'', addressed to Zeuxippus and explaining the number system used in ''The Sand Reckoner''; ''On Balances and Levers''; ''On Centers of Gravity''; ''On the Calendar''. Of the surviving works by Archimedes, T. L. Heath offers the following suggestion as to the order in which they were written: ''On the Equilibrium of Planes I'', ''The Quadrature of the Parabola'', ''On the Equilibrium of Planes II'', ''On the Sphere and the Cylinder I, II'', ''On Spirals'', ''On Conoids and Spheroids'', ''On Floating Bodies I, II'', ''On the Measurement of a Circle'', ''The Sand Reckoner''.

c. Boyer, Carl Benjamin ''A History of Mathematics'' (1991) ISBN 0471543977 &quot;Arabic scholars inform us that the familiar area formula for a triangle in terms of its three sides, usually known as Heron's formula&amp;mdash;k=sqrt(s(s-a)(s-b)(s-c)), where s is the semiperimeter&amp;mdash;was known to Archimedes several centuries before Heron lived. Arabic scholars also attribute to Archimedes the 'theorem on the broken chord' [...] Archimedes is reported by the Arabs to have given several proofs of the theorem.&quot;

=References=
;
;
;

Further reading
*
* Republished translation of the 1938 study of Archimedes and his works by an historian of science.
*
*
* Complete works of Archimedes in English.
*
*
*

External links


*[http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/history/inourtime/inourtime_20070125.shtml Archimedes—The Greek mathematician and his Eureka moments]—BBC Radio 4 discussion from ''In Our Time'', broadcast January 25, 2007 (requires RealPlayer)
*[http://www.archimedespalimpsest.org/ The Archimedes Palimpsest project at The Walters Art Museum in Baltimore, Maryland]
*[http://mathdb.org/articles/archimedes/e_archimedes.htm The Mathematical Achievements and Methodologies of Archimedes]
*[http://www.mathpages.com/home/kmath038.htm Article examining how Archimedes may have calculated the square root of 3] at MathPages
*[http://www.mathpages.com/home/kmath343.htm Archimedes On Spheres and Cylinders] at MathPages
*[http://www.wilbourhall.org PDF scans of Heiberg's edition of the Works of Archimedes, now in the public domain] (Text in Classical Greek)
*[http://www.cs.drexel.edu/~crorres/bbc_archive/mirrors_sailors_sakas.jpg Photograph of the Sakkas experiment in 1973]





;


Category:Archimedes|*
Category:287 BC births
Category:212 BC deaths
Category:People from Syracuse (city), Sicily
Category:Ancient Greek engineers
Category:Ancient Greek inventors
Category:Ancient Greek mathematicians
Category:Ancient Greek physicists
Category:Hellenistic philosophers
Category:Sicilian Greeks
Category:Sicilian mathematicians|Archimedes
Category:Sicilian scientists|Archimedes
Category:Murdered scientists
Category:Geometers
Category:Greek murder victims
Category:Ancient Syracusians


af:Archimedes
ar:أرخميدس
az:Arximed
bn:আর্কিমিডিস
zh-min-nan:Archimedes
map-bms:Archimedes
be-x-old:Архімэд
bs:Arhimed
br:Arc'himedes
bg:Архимед
ca:Arquimedes
cs:Archimédés
cy:Archimedes
da:Arkimedes
de:Archimedes
et:Archimedes
el:Αρχιμήδης
es:Arquímedes
eo:Arkimedo
eu:Arkimedes
fa:ارشمیدس
fr:Archimède
gd:Archimedes
gl:Arquimedes
ko:아르키메데스
hi:आर्किमिडिज़
hr:Arhimed
io:Archimede
id:Archimedes
ia:Archimedes
is:Arkímedes
it:Archimede
he:ארכימדס
jv:Archimedes
ka:არქიმედე
ku:Archimedes
la:Archimedes
lv:Arhimēds
lb:Archimedes
lt:Archimedas
hu:Arkhimédész
mk:Архимед
ml:ആര്‍ക്കിമിഡീസ്‌
mt:Arkimede
nl:Archimedes
ja:アルキメデス
no:Arkimedes
nn:Arkimedes
pms:Archimede
pl:Archimedes
pt:Arquimedes
ro:Arhimede
ru:Архимед
sco:Archimedes
sq:Arkimedi
scn:Archimedi
simple:Archimedes
sk:Archimedes
sl:Arhimed
sr:Архимед
sh:Arhimed
su:Archimedes
fi:Arkhimedes
sv:Arkimedes
tl:Archimedes
th:อาร์คิมิดีส
vi:Archimedes
tg:Архимед
tr:Arşimet
uk:Архімед
ur:ارشمیدس
diq:Archimedes
zh:阿基米德