Quark matter or QCD matter (see QCD) refers to any of a number of theorized
phases of matter whose degrees of freedom include
quarks and gluons. These theoretic phases would occur at extremely high
temperatures and densities, billions of times higher than 
can be produced in equilibrium in laboratories.
Under such extreme conditions, the familiar
structure of matter, with quarks arranged into nucleons and
nucleons bound into nuclei and surrounded by electrons, is
completely disrupted, and the quarks roam freely.
This is analogous to the way that the crystal
structure of ice is disrupted by heating or compression, and melts
into a liquid of more elementary constituents (water molecules).

In the standard model of particle physics, the strongest force is
the strong interaction, which is described by the theory of
quantum chromodynamics (QCD). At ordinary temperatures or
densities this force just confines the quarks into
composite particles (hadrons) of size 
around 10;−15;m = 1 femtometer = 1 fm 
(corresponding to the QCD energy scale 
&amp;Lambda;;QCD;&amp;asymp;200 MeV) 
and its effects are not noticeable at longer
distances. However, when the temperature reaches the
QCD energy scale (T of order 10;12;K) 
or the density rises to the point where the
average inter-quark separation is less than 1 fm (quark chemical potential &amp;mu; around 400 MeV), the hadrons are melted into their
constituent quarks, and the strong interaction becomes the dominant
feature of the physics. Such phases are called quark matter or QCD
matter.



Occurrence
=Natural occurrence=

* The early universe. According to the theory of the big bang, at very early times, when the universe was only a few tens of microseconds old, the temperature was so high that all matter took the form of a hot phase of quark matter called the quark-gluon plasma (QGP).
* Compact stars (neutron stars). A neutron star is much cooler than 10;12; K, but it is compressed by its own weight to such high densities that it is reasonable to surmise that quark matter may exist in the interior. Compact stars composed mostly or entirely of quark matter are known as quark stars or strange stars.The nuclear matter component of strange stars, if there is one, is believed to consist only of a tiny surface crust.
* Strangelets. These are hypothetical lumps of strange matter that might populate interstellar space. They only exist if nuclear matter is metastable against decay into quark matter: this is generally regarded as a fairly radical hypothesis.

=Artificial occurrence=

* Heavy-ion collisions. Physicists can produce small short-lived regions of space whose energy density is comparable to that of the 20-microsecond-old universe. This is achieved by colliding heavy nuclei at high speeds. Extremely powerful accelerators are needed, such as RHIC at Brookhaven National Laboratory in the USA, or the future LHC at CERN in Switzerland/France. There is good evidence that the quark-gluon plasma has been produced at RHIC ;B. M&amp;uuml;ller &quot;Quark Matter 2005 -- Theoretical Summary&quot;,[http://www.arxiv.org/abs/nucl-th/0508062 arxiv.org:nucl-th/0508062] ;.

Thermodynamics

The context for understanding the thermodynamics of quark matter is
the standard model of particle physics, which contains six different
flavors of quarks, as well as
leptons like electrons and neutrinos.These
interact via the strong interaction, electromagnetism, and
also the weak interaction which allows one flavor of quark to turn
into another. Electromagnetic interactions occur between particles
that carry electrical charge; strong interactions occur between
particles that carry color charge.

The correct thermodynamic treatment of quark matter depends on the
physical context. For large quantities that exist for long periods
of time (the &quot;thermodynamic limit&quot;), we must take into account the fact that
the only conserved charges in the standard model are quark
number (equivalent to baryon number), electric charge, the eight color
charges, and lepton number. Each of these can have an associated
chemical potential.However, large volumes of matter must be electrically and
color-neutral, which determines the electric and color charge chemical
potentials. This leaves a three-dimensional phase space,
parameterized by quark chemical
potential, lepton chemical potential, and temperature.

In compact stars quark matter would occupy cubic kilometers and
exist for millions of years, so the thermodynamic limit is
appropriate. However, the neutrinos 
escape, violating lepton number, so the phase space for
quark matter in compact stars only has two
dimensions, temperature (T) and quark number chemical potential &amp;mu;
(see next section). A strangelet is not in the thermodynamic 
limit of large volume, so it is like an exotic nucleus: it may carry
electric charge.
A heavy-ion collision is in neither the thermodynamic 
limit of large volumes nor long times. Putting aside questions of whether
it is sufficiently equilibrated for thermodynamics to be applicable,
there is certainly not enough time for weak interactions to occur, so flavor
is conserved, and there are independent chemical potentials for all six
quark flavors. The initial conditions 
(the impact parameter of the collision, the number of up and down quarks
in the colliding nuclei, and the fact that they contain no quarks of
other flavors) determine the chemical potentials.

Phase diagram

Image:QCD_phase_diagram.png|frame|right|Conjectured form of the phase
diagram of QCD matter|Conjectured form of the phase
diagram of QCD matter 
The phase diagram of quark matter is not well known, either
experimentally or theoretically. A commonly conjectured form of the
phase diagram is shown in the figure. It is applicable
to matter in a compact star, where the only relevant thermodynamic potentials
are quark chemical potential &amp;mu; and temperature T. For guidance
it also shows the typical values of &amp;mu; and T in heavy-ion collisions 
and in the early universe. For readers who are not familiar with 
the concept of a chemical potential, it is helpful to think of
&amp;mu; as a measure of the imbalance between quarks and antiquarks in
the system. Higher &amp;mu; means higher density of quarks.

Ordinary atomic matter as we know it is really a mixed phase, droplets
of nuclear matter (nuclei) surrounded by vacuum, which exists at the
low-temperature phase boundary between vacuum and nuclear matter, at
&amp;mu;=310MeV and T close to zero. If we increase the quark density
(i.e. increase &amp;mu;) keeping the temperature low, we move into a phase
of more and more compressed nuclear matter. Following this path
corresponds to burrowing more and more deeply into a neutron star.
Eventually, at an unknown critical value of &amp;mu;, there is a
transition to quark matter. At ultra-high densities we expect to find
the color-flavor-locked (CFL) phase of 
color-superconducting quark matter. At
intermediate densities we expect some other phases 
(labelled &quot;non-CFL quark liquid&quot; in the figure) whose nature is
presently unknown. They might be other forms of color-superconducting
quark matter, or something different.

Now, imagine starting at the bottom left corner of the phase diagram,
in the vacuum where &amp;mu;=T=0. If we heat up the system without
introducing any preference for quarks over antiquarks, 
this corresponds to moving vertically upwards
along the T axis. At first, quarks are still confined and we create a
gas of hadrons (pions, mostly). Then
around T=170 MeV there is a crossover to the quark gluon plasma:
thermal fluctuations break up the pions, and we find a 
gas of quarks, antiquarks,
and gluons, as well as lighter particles such as
photons, electrons, positrons, etc. Following this path corresponds 
to travelling far back in time, to the state of the universe shortly
after the big bang (where there was a very tiny preference for
quarks over antiquarks).

The line that rises up from the nuclear/quark matter transition and
then bends back towards the T axis, with its end marked by a star,
is the conjectured boundary between
confined and unconfined phases. Until recently it was also
believed to be a boundary between phases where chiral symmetry is
broken (low temperature and density) and phases where it is unbroken
(high temperature and density). It is now known that the CFL phase
exhibits chiral symmetry breaking, and other quark matter phases
may also break chiral symmetry, 
so it is not clear whether this is really a chiral transition
line. The line ends at the 
&quot;chiral critical point&quot;, marked by
a star in this figure, which is a special
temperature and density at which striking physical phenomena
(analogous to critical opalescence) are expected (see &quot;open questions&quot;
below).

Theoretical challenges: calculation techniques

The phase structure of quark matter remains mostly conjectural because
it is difficult to perform calculations predicting the properties of
quark matter.
The reason is that QCD, the theory describing the dominant 
interaction between quarks, is strongly coupled at the densities and
temperatures of greatest physical interest, and hence it is very
hard to obtain any predictions from it. Here are brief descriptions
of some of the standard approaches.

=Lattice gauge theory=

The only first-principles calculational tool currently available is lattice QCD, i.e. brute-force computer calculations. Because of a technical obstacle known as the fermion sign problem, this method can only be used at low density and high temperature (&amp;mu;;U. Heller, &quot;Recent progress in finite temperature lattice QCD&quot;, [http://www.arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0610299 PoS (LAT2006) 011]; However, it cannot be used to investigate the interesting color-superconducting phase structure at high density and low temperature ;C. Schmidt, &quot;Lattice QCD at Finite Density&quot;, [http://www.arxiv.org/abs/hep-lat/0610116 PoS (LAT2006) 021] ;.

=Weak coupling theory=

Because QCD is asymptotically free it becomes
weakly coupled at unrealistically high densities, and diagrammatic
methods can be used ; D. Rischke, &quot;The quark-gluon plasma in equilibrium&quot;,[http://www.arxiv.org/abs/nucl-th/0305030 Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 52, 197 (2004)];. Such methods show that the CFL phase occurs at very high density. At high temperatures, however, diagrammatic methods are still not under full control.

=Models=

To obtain a rough idea of what phases might occur, one can use a
model that has some of the same properties as QCD, but is easier
to manipulate. Many physicists use Nambu-Jona-Lasinio models,
which contain no gluons, and replace the strong interaction with
a four-fermion interaction. Mean-field methods are commonly used
to analyse the phases. Another approach is the bag model, 
in which the effects of confinement are simulated by an additive energy density
that penalizes unconfined quark matter.

=Effective theories=

Many physicists simply give up on a microscopic approach, and
make informed guesses of the expected phases (perhaps based on NJL
model results). For each phase, they then write down an effective
theory for the low-energy excitations, in terms of a small number of
parameters, and use it to make predictions that could allow those
parameters to be fixed by experimental observations ;T. Sch&amp;auml;fer, &quot;Quark matter&quot;, [http://www.arXiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0304281 arxiv.org:hep-ph/0304281];.

=Other approaches=

There are other methods that are sometimes used to shed light on QCD, but for various reasons turn out not to be particularly useful
in studying quark matter.

* 1/N expansion. Treat the number of colors N, which is actually 3, as a large number, and expand in powers of 1/N. It turns out that at high density the higher-order corrections are large, and the expansion gives misleading results.

* Supersymmetry. Adding scalar quarks (squarks) and fermionic gluons (gluinos) to the theory makes it more tractable, but the thermodynamics of quark matter depends crucially on the fact that only fermions can carry quark number, and on the number of degrees of freedom in general.


Experimental challenges

Experimentally, it is hard to map the phase diagram of quark matter
because it is impossible to achieve high enough temperatures
and densities in the laboratory. Heavy-ion collisions provide
information about the crossover from hadronic matter to QGP.
Observations of compact stars may provide information about the
high-density low-temperature region. Studies of the cooling,
spin-down, and precession of these stars have already given
information about the properties of their interior. As
observations become more precise we hope to learn more.

One of the natural subjects for future research is the exact location of the chiral critical point. Some ambitious lattice QCD calculations may have found evidence for it, and future calculations will clarify the situation. Heavy-ion collisions might be able to
measure its position experimentally, but this will require
scanning across a range of values of &amp;mu; and T ;K. Rajagopal, &quot;Mapping the QCD Phase Diagram&quot;, [http://www.arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9908360Nucl.Phys. A661 (1999) 150-161 ];, a project that may be undertaken in future experiments.



See also
* Quantum chromodynamics
* Quark-gluon plasma
* Lattice QCD
* 1/N expansion
* Strange matter
* quark star

Further reading

* S. Hands, &quot;The phase diagram of QCD&quot; [http://www.arXiv.org/abs/physics/0105022 Contemp. Phys. 42, 209 (2001)]

References

;



Category:Particle physics
Category:Quark matter 
Category:Quantum_chromodynamics
Category:phases of matter
Category:Plasma physics

it:Materia di quark
pt:Matéria QCD
tr:QCD özdeği