
 August 231997; August 251997
|genre = First-person shooter
|modes = Single player, multiplayer
|ratings = ESRB: T (Teen): Animated Blood, Animated Violence;ELSPA: 15+;USK: 18;OFLC: MA15+
|platforms = Nintendo 64
|media = 128&amp;nbsp;Mb (16&amp;nbsp;MB) cartridge
|Requirements =
|input = Nintendo 64 Controller
}}
''GoldenEye 007'' is a 1997 first-person shooter video game developed by Rare for the Nintendo 64 video game console, and based on the 1995 James Bond film ''GoldenEye''.

The game has received very positive reviews;; and sold over eight million copies.;; It is considered an important title in the development of first person shooters, and has become particularly well-known for the quality of its multiplayer deathmatch mode, as well as its incorporation of stealth-based game|stealth and varied objectives into its single player missions.

''GoldenEye 007'' was followed by a spiritual successor, ''Perfect Dark'', also developed by Rare. 

Development
''GoldenEye 007'' was originally announced for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System before being stepped up to the Nintendo 64.;; The intention for the first few months of development was for the game to be an on-rails shooter similar to ''Virtua Cop''; it only became a first-person shooter later in development.;;

The development team working on ''GoldenEye 007'' was inexperienced; for all but two of them, it was their first game. As David Doak explained, &quot;Looking back, there are things I'd be wary of attempting now, but as none of the people working on the code, graphics and game design had worked on a game before, there was this joyful naïvety.&quot;;;

The game is based upon the ''GoldenEye'' film and its novelization by John Gardner, but, as game designer Martin Hollis explained, many of the missions were extended or modified to allow the player to participate in sequences of which Bond was not originally a part, or those in which he only played a minor role.; The original sets that were created for the film were first converted into complete, believable environments by one group of game designers; when this process was complete, other designers began populating them with objectives, characters and obstacles in order to create a balanced and fun game. According to Martin Hollis, &quot;many of the levels in the game have a realistic and non-linear feel. There are rooms with no direct relevance to the level. There are multiple routes across the level.&quot;; Hollis also noted that the concept of several varied objectives within each level was inspired by the multiple tasks in each stage of ''Super Mario 64''.;

''GoldenEye'' was developed through two and a half years, but, according to Martin Hollis, only the last year was spent developing the game. During the beginning, the engine was built, art assets were made, and the enemy AI was written and polished.; The game was delayed numerous times, partly because during development, the team decided to incorporate a multiplayer feature to the game to demonstrate the N64's 4-player capabilities.

In addition to the N64 game, a version of ''GoldenEye'' was in development for the Nintendo Virtual Boy, but cancelled before release.;;;

Gameplay and design
A mission dossier for the Aztec level in ''GoldenEye 007''. The red crosshair used to navigate the menus is also used as an aiming indicator in the game itself.
''GoldenEye 007s menu system is presented as an MI6 dossier.;The letters &quot;OHMSS&quot; appear on each of the menu dossiers, in a reference to the term O.H.M.S. and the James Bond novel and film ''On Her Majesty's Secret Service''.; Four save files are available to track the player's progress through the game's twenty missions, each of which may be played on either &quot;Agent&quot;, &quot;Secret Agent&quot;, &quot;00-Agent&quot;, or 007 Agent difficulty settings, with higher difficulties requiring the player to complete additional and more complex objectives. M, Q, and Miss Moneypenny provide background information on the chosen mission and its goals.;; 

Once a mission is completed, the player may either continue progressing through the story or choose to replay a previously completed level. Completing certain missions within particular target times enables the player to unlock bonus cheat options which make various changes to the graphics and gameplay, and upon fully completing the game on the 00-Agent difficulty level, an additional &quot;007&quot; setting allows the player to customize the challenge of any mission.;

The player's initial weapon in most missions is the PP7, an equivalent of James Bond's Walther PPK. Most of the game's firearms are modelled on real-life counterparts, while others are based on fictitious devices featured in the Bond films, such as the Golden Gun and Moonraker Directed-energy weapon#Lasers|laser. The weapons vary in characteristics such as rate of fire and type of ammunition used, and inflict different levels of damage depending on which body part they hit.;; Stealth-based game|Stealth is an important element of the game: in order to avoid gunfights with multiple opponents, it is advantageous to eliminate soldiers and security cameras before they spot or hear the player. Certain weapons may be powerful enough to shoot through doors and helmets but are very loud, while others incorporate suppressor or zoom lens attachments to aid the player in killing enemies discreetly.

Some gadgets from the James Bond film series are featured in the game and are often used to complete particular mission objectives; for example, 007's in-game watch includes both the laser from the ''GoldenEye'' film, the remote mine detonator from ''GoldenEye'' and ''Moonraker'', and the Rolex Submariner#Submariner in film|electromagnet from ''Live and Let Die''.; 

=Multiplayer mode=
The multiplayer mode was added late in the development process; Martin Hollis noted that the setting was &quot;a complete afterthought&quot;.; According to David Doak, the majority of the work on the multiplayer mode was done by Steve Ellis, who &quot;sat in a room with all the code written for a single-player game and turned ''GoldenEye'' into a multiplayer game.&quot;;

The multiplayer mode features all of the characters in the game, including enemies and civilians. At first, only 12 characters are available, with 21 more becoming available as progress is made through the game. A button code allows players to temporarily unlock another 31 characters, all but two of them likenesses of the programmers.;; Variations between characters' heights and builds can affect the challenge of shooting them; for example, there is a significant difference between defeating List of James Bond henchmen in Goldfinger#Oddjob|Oddjob and List of James Bond henchmen in The Spy Who Loved Me#Jaws|Jaws.;

As with the selectable characters, only a few arenas are available at first, with more becoming available as progress is made in the game. There are eleven arenas, not counting levels that can only be accessed with a GameShark, and a &quot;random&quot; button that chooses the level randomly. The multiplayer-only arenas are: Temple, Complex, Caves, Library, Basement, and Stack. Several arenas are taken from the single player mode, with alterations such as restrictions on which sections of the map can be used - they are the Facility, Bunker, Archives, Caverns, and Egyptian.;

The multiplayer mode features five general scenarios, within which options such as weapon schemes may be altered. Weapon selections in the multiplayer mode are grouped by type, such as pistols, automatics, and explosives. Other selectable weapon schemes focus on weapons not frequently found in the single player mode, such as laser guns, knife throwing#The throwing knife|throwing knives or the one-hit kill Golden Gun. The &quot;Slappers Only!&quot; setting removes all projectiles, limiting players to hand-to-hand combat.;

;Normal: A basic free-for-all deathmatch mode, in which players attempt to kill their opponents as many times as possible within a set amount of time. This mode can also be played in teams of 2 versus 1, 2 versus 2, and 3 versus 1.

;You Only Live Twice: Similar to Normal mode, except players only have two lives before they are eliminated.

;The Living Daylights [Flag Tag]: In this adaptation of the playground game &quot;Tag (game)#Smear the queer|Tag&quot;, a flag is placed in a random location in the map. The player who holds it the longest wins the match. A player cannot use weapons while holding the flag, but can still collect them to keep opponents from stocking up on ammo.;

;The Man with the Golden Gun: A single Golden Gun is placed in a random location on the map. Players must find and pick up the Golden Gun, which is able to kill opponents with only one shot regardless of where they are hit, even if they are wearing body armour. After a player acquires the gun, the others are able to see him or her on their radar. The player with the golden gun is unable to pick up body armour and the golden gun does not respawn, so others can only pick it up by eliminating the player who has it.;

;License to Kill: All attacks, including &quot;slapping&quot;, will kill opponents in one hit. This mode cannot be played in teams, unlike the other scenarios.

=Easter eggs=
Several references to James Bond films exist in ''GoldenEye 007'', the most apparent being the titles of the various multiplayer modes and the Bond Girl names for the game's control schemes. The closed-circuit television|CCTV tape found in the second Bunker mission has the cover of the VHS release of the ''GoldenEye'' film.;;

Several members of the game's development staff were featured in the game as generic character faces. Bond's double-agent contact &quot;Dr. Doak&quot; in the &quot;Facility&quot; mission is named after and bears the likeness of David Doak. The &quot;Klobb&quot; weapon (originally &quot;Spyder&quot;), is named after former Nintendo employee Ken Lobb.;;

It is also possible to fire weapons during cutscenes using a second controller. Any characters hit will react appropriately. However, it is not clear whether this is an easter egg or a programming glitch.;;

Storyline
Screenshot from the Byelomorye Dam level in ''GoldenEye 007''
Like the movie, ''GoldenEye 007'' starts in Arkhangelsk, USSR during the mid-1980s, where MI6 has uncovered a secret chemical weapons facility at the Byelomorye Dam. James Bond is sent to infiltrate the facility by bungee jumping from the dam, then join his friend and fellow 00-agent Alec Trevelyan in destroying the factory. During the mission, Trevelyan is apparently killed by List of James Bond henchmen in GoldenEye#Ourumov|Colonel Arkady Ourumov, but Bond escapes by commandeering an Fixed-wing aircraft|aeroplane.

The following missions depict 007's investigation of the satellite control station in Severnaya, Russia where Natalya Simonova and List of James Bond henchmen in GoldenEye#Boris Grishenko|Boris Grishenko work, a location he did not visit in the film. Entirely new to the game is the &quot;Silo&quot; mission in which Bond investigates an unscheduled test firing of a missile in Kirghizstan, believed to be a cover for the launch of a satellite known as ''GoldenEye''. This space-based weapon works by firing a concentrated electromagnetic pulse (EMP) at any Earth target to disable any electrical circuit within range; from its orbit, it would be a threat to any city on Earth.

Bond holding the silenced PP7 in the Bunker level. The red bar indicates that the player took a hit.
Bond's visit to Monte Carlo and investigation of the frigate ''La Fayette'' and the Eurocopter Tiger (referred to as the &quot;Pirate&quot; in the game) were featured in the film, but here they are expanded, with Bond rescuing several hostages inside the ship and planting a tracker bug on the helicopter before it is stolen by the Janus crime syndicate. Bond is then sent a second time to Severnaya, but during the mission he is captured and locked up in the bunker's cells along with Natalya Simonova — this meeting takes place much earlier than in the film. The two escape the complex seconds before it is destroyed, on the orders of Ourumov, by the ''GoldenEye'' satellite's EMP.

As in the film, Bond next travels to St. Petersburg, where he arranges with ex-KGB agent List of James Bond allies in GoldenEye#Valentin Dmitrovich Zukovsky|Valentin Zukovsky to meet the chief of the Janus organisation. This is revealed to be Alec Trevelyan — his execution by Ourumov in the Arkhangelsk facility was faked. Bond and Natalya escape from Trevelyan, but are arrested by the Russian police and taken to the military archives for interrogation. The player must escape the interrogation room, rescue Natalya and communicate with Defence Minister List of James Bond allies in GoldenEye#Dimitri Mishkin|Dimitri Mishkin, who has verified Bond's claim of Ourumov's treachery.

Natalya is captured by General Ourumov, and Bond gives chase with a tank through the streets of St. Petersburg, eventually reaching an arms depot used by Janus — the player must destroy its weaponry stores, then hitch a ride on Trevelyan's Soviet missile train. This section features many departures from the film storyline, where Bond does not reach the depot, and only enters the train after stopping it with the tank. Bond makes his way through the train, killing Ouromov and rescuing Natalya. However, Alec Trevelyan and his ally List of James Bond henchmen in GoldenEye#Xenia Onatopp|Xenia Onatopp escape to their secret base in Cuba.

Screenshot from the Janus control center level in ''GoldenEye 007''
Natalya accompanies Bond to the Caribbean. Surveying the Cuban jungle aerially, their light aircraft is shot down. Unscathed, Bond and Natalya perform a ground search of the area's heavily guarded jungle terrain, but are ambushed by Xenia, who is quickly killed by Bond. Bond sneaks Natalya into the control center to disrupt transmissions to the ''GoldenEye'' satellite and force it to burn up in the Earth's atmosphere. An original mission shows Bond following the fleeing Trevelyan through a series of flooded caverns before arriving at the antenna of the control centre's radio telescope. Trevelyan attempts to re-align it in a final attempt to restore contact with the ''GoldenEye''. Bond destroys machinery vital to controlling the dish and kills Trevelyan in a precarious firefight high above the dish.

=Additional missions=
Two further missions unrelated to the ''GoldenEye'' film were included as bonuses for the completion of the game on higher difficulties. The first, &quot;Aztec Complex&quot;, is partially based on the James Bond film ''Moonraker'', and is unlocked when the player completes the entire game on Secret Agent difficulty. During the mission, Bond is sent to the Aztec complex in Teotihuacán to investigate the Drax Corporation's unlicensed space exploration in which at least one space shuttle was stolen from NASA. Although Hugo Drax was killed by Bond in the movie, it has seemed that his corporation still existed after his death due to remnants and fragments that were still active. MI6 believes their intentions with the shuttle in space are military in nature and authorizes Bond to reprogram the shuttle's guidance computer so that MI6 can take control of the craft once it reaches orbit. During the mission, Jaws makes a return in an effort to stop Bond from completing his mission. Many of the rooms in the mission were from the movie and included several new features, such as the launch room for the ''Moonraker'' shuttle.

The second bonus level, &quot;Egyptian Temple&quot;, blends elements from the films ''The Man with the Golden Gun'', ''The Spy Who Loved Me'' and ''Live and Let Die''. To access this level players must complete the entire game on 00 Agent difficulty.; Prior to the mission, M informs Bond that a person claiming to be List of James Bond henchmen in Live and Let Die#Baron Samedi|Baron Samedi is in possession of the deceased Francisco Scaramanga's legendary &quot;Golden Gun&quot; pistol. Samedi has invited James Bond to the El-Saghira temple in the Valley of the Kings to retrieve it. Knowing it is a trap, M sends Bond regardless to take possession of the Golden Gun and eliminate Baron Samedi. Although the player &quot;kills&quot; Samedi three times during the level, he can be seen laughing in an end-of-level cut scene, similar to the ending of ''Live and Let Die''.

Unfinished features
=Citadel=
GameShark users found several text references to a level called &quot;Citadel&quot; in the game. Rare explained its nature, and joked about players' speculation that multiplayer-mode Bond characters could be seen in the single-player game: &quot;'Citadel' was a very rough test level designed during the early stages of multiplayer mode. It is not in the finished game in any shape or form, and Oddjob and Mayday would not be in it if it was.&quot;;;

It was thought that a few textual references were all that remained of the level. In 2004, ''GoldenEye 007'' fan sites uncovered an unplayable but viewable single-player version of the level (with implemented sky and water textures).;;

In 2005, the website ''GoldenEye Forever'' revealed that it was possible to access a fully playable multiplayer version by linking a GameShark to a computer.;;
The codes to access Citadel in its fullest state totaled nearly 10,000 lines. The test map is largely a mass of shapes and ramps that the players can climb upon, thus giving players many opportunities for sniping and for hiding.;;

=All Bonds=
Before ''GoldenEye 007'' was released, Rare had placed a feature in the multiplayer mode of the game, known as the &quot;All Bonds&quot; option.;; This would allow players to choose four of the five actors (at the time of the game) who had portrayed Bond in various films; Sean Connery, Roger Moore, Timothy Dalton and Pierce Brosnan. George Lazenby was not included. However, before the game was released, Rare removed the feature for unexplained reasons. It is assumed that Rare had every intention to release the game with the feature, but was later forced to remove it (possibly due to legal problems with EON Productions, Danjaq, LLC, or the other Bond actors themselves). In response, Rare said &quot;Yes, it was the hope of the team that [all Bonds] would be available to play, but for various reasons they weren't.&quot;;

All Bonds face/suit mapping created with ''GoldenEye ROM Editor''
In addition, the actors' portraits were at one point used to illustrate the four single-player save file dossiers; this was also removed, with Pierce Brosnan's portrait appearing on all four in the final version.

Not all remnants of the All Bonds feature were completely removed from the ''GoldenEye'' software. One major clue was the fact that the portraits of the four Bonds in the selection screen for multiplayer mode were accessible by using a GameShark. Also, various screenshots in the game manual, such as one from the multiplayer selection screen, show traces of the former Bond portraits. The follow-up game, Perfect Dark, also contains traces of the All Bonds cheat — there are four tuxedo characters available in multiplayer, corresponding to the four suits seen in the Beta version screenshots, which were used in Perfect Dark for the &quot;Dinner Jacket&quot; characters.;; The James Bond head used in the Aztec and Egyptian bonus levels of ''GoldenEye 007'' is not the same as the one from the standard missions.

The feature was brought to the attention of many gamers when the gaming magazine ''Electronic Gaming Monthly'' published an April issue with what they called the &quot;All Bonds Cheat&quot;, using some fake screenshots &quot;to support&quot; its claim. The magazine reported that to unlock the option in the cheat menu, a player must complete the Aztec mission on 007 difficulty in less than nine minutes with all customisable enemy settings on the highest difficulty. The claim was later found to be an April Fools prank, which the magazine held annually.

In 2005, a program called the GoldenEye ROM Editor was released by The Rare Witch Project.;; The coders SubDrag and Ice Mario cracked the compression format of the images used by the game, allowing any image in the game's memory to be viewed and edited, by opening up a ROM image of the game. It was then discovered that the All Bonds faces and suits ''are'' still in the game; Rare had only removed the ability to use them. By mapping them onto other multiplayer characters' faces and bodies, one can try to recreate All Bonds, although since the body and head shapes do not match the textures, it will not look as it was intended.

Reaction
{|class=&quot;infobox bordered&quot; style=&quot;font-size: 90%;&quot;
|+Reviews and awards
!Publication
!Score
!Comment
|-
|;''EGM''
|;9.37 out of 10
|
|-
|;IGN
|;9.7 of 10;;
|;Editor's Choice
|-
|;GameSpot
|;9.8 of 10;;
|;Editor's Choice
|-
|;''Edge''
|;9 of 10
|
|-
!colspan=3|Compilations of multiple reviews
|-
|;Game Rankings
|colspan=2|;96 of 100 (based on 21 reviews);
|-
|;Metacritic
|colspan=2|;96 of 100 (based on 21 reviews);;
|-
!colspan=3|Awards
|-
|;1st Annual Interactive;Achievement Awards
|colspan=2|;Console Action Game of the Year;Console Game of the Year;Interactive Title of the Year;Outstanding Achievement in Software Engineering
|-
|;BAFTA ; Interactive Entertainment
|colspan=2|; Games Award
|}

When ''GoldenEye 007'' was released in 1997, its stealth elements and varied objectives contrasted with the approaches taken by ''Doom'' and ''Quake'', and its split-screen deathmatch mode proved popular, selling eight million copies.;

Along with Shiny Entertainment's ''MDK'', ''GoldenEye'' is credited with popularizing the video game convention of a zoomable sniper rifle, enabling players to kill oblivious enemies from vast distances away with a single, precise headshot; context-sensitive enemy hit-locations were also pioneered by the game.

In 1998, ''GoldenEye'' received the BAFTA Interactive Entertainment &quot;Games Award&quot; and Rare won the award for &quot;Best UK Developer&quot;.;;;;; It also won four awards from the Academy of Interactive Arts and Sciences: &quot;Console Action Game of the Year&quot;, &quot;Console Game of the Year&quot;, &quot;Interactive Title of the Year&quot; and &quot;Outstanding Achievement in Software Engineering&quot;. Additionally, it was nominated for &quot;Outstanding Achievement in Art/Graphics&quot; and &quot;Outstanding Achievement in Interactive Design&quot;.;

In a January 2000 poll, readers of the long-running British video game magazine ''Computer and Video Games'' voted ''GoldenEye 007'' into first place in a list of &quot;the hundred greatest video games&quot;.;; In a poll in the next year, the game was ranked 5th.;; Also in 2001, ''GameInformer'' magazine ranked ''GoldenEye 007'' 16th in a list of the &quot;Top 100 Games of All Time&quot;.;&quot;Top 100 Games of All Time.&quot; ''GameInformer''. August 2001: 35.; In 2005, a &quot;Best Games of All-Time&quot; poll at GameFAQs placed ''GoldenEye 007'' at 7th.;; In a list made by IGN in 2005, ''GoldenEye'' was ranked 29th;; while the Reader's Choice placed it at 7th.;;

The game originally received a &quot;nine out of ten&quot; score in ''Edge'', with the magazine later stating that &quot;a ten was considered, but eventually rejected&quot;.;; In the magazine's 10th anniversary issue in 2003, the game was included as one of their top ten shooters, along with a note that it was &quot;the only other game&quot; that should have received the prestigious &quot;ten out of ten&quot; rating.;;

The game continues to be played by fans, many of whom have developed online communities based around popular aspects of the game. There are those who enjoy replaying single-player levels in an attempt to achieve fast times, those who battle others in its deathmatch mode, while others use GameSharks and similar devices to examine and to modify the game's code. On October 25, 2006, a fansite, The Rare Witch Project, released a level editor that allows users to place objects and write AI routines for existing stages on a ROM image, so new stages can be developed.;;

Sequels
Screenshot from the Rare follow-up, ''Perfect Dark''.

Following the success of ''GoldenEye 007'', Rare commenced work on a similar-style first-person shooter, titled ''Perfect Dark''. It was decided that this game would use an enhanced version of the ''GoldenEye 007'' engine but would be a completely new franchise that would be owned by Rare. For this reason, when ''Perfect Dark'' was eventually released for the N64 in 2000 after numerous delays, it was marketed and hyped as a &quot;spiritual sequel&quot; to ''GoldenEye''. Although it has no official Bond license, it features many references to 007 and the former game: the four &quot;dinner jacket&quot; characters strongly resemble the tuxedos that were worn by Sean Connery, Roger Moore, Timothy Dalton and Pierce Brosnan; the BAFTA Interactive award that Rare received for work on the previous game can be found hidden in a vault in one level; several of the maps from ''GoldenEye'' return for use in ''Perfect Darks deathmatch mode. In 2005, David Doak commented, &quot;''GoldenEye'' pretty much exhausted the performance of the machine. It was hard to push it further. ''Perfect Dark'' had some good ideas but was dog slow.&quot;;

A number of the ''GoldenEye 007'' team left Rare soon after development on ''Perfect Dark'' commenced, beginning with Martin Hollis in 1998, who after working on the GameCube at Nintendo of America formed his own company Zoonami in 2000.;; Other members formed Free Radical Design, and four of the team of nine who originally worked on ''GoldenEye 007'' are now employed there, including David Doak, Karl Hilton and Steve Ellis. This company's most prominent creations are the ''TimeSplitters'' series of first-person shooters, which are considered by some to be, like ''Perfect Dark'', &quot;spiritual sequels&quot; to the original game. The ''TimeSplitters'' series contains many references to ''GoldenEye 007''; the design of the health-HUD, the nature of the aiming system and the dam setting of the opening level of the second game are among the more obvious.

The James Bond game licence was acquired by Electronic Arts in 1999, which published new games based upon the then-recent James Bond films ''Tomorrow Never Dies'' and ''The World Is Not Enough''. The latter game, along with others published by EA such as ''Agent Under Fire'' and ''Nightfire'' are similar in style to ''GoldenEye 007''.

In the autumn of 2004, Electronic Arts released ''GoldenEye: Rogue Agent'' for Xbox, PlayStation 2, GameCube and later the Nintendo DS. This is the first game based on the 007 franchise in which the player does not take on the role of James Bond himself; rather they control an aspiring 00-agent (named GoldenEye) who is recruited by Auric Goldfinger, the villain in the movie and book ''Goldfinger''. The game has little to do with either the film ''GoldenEye'' or the N64 game, and was released to mediocre reviews;Metacritic review scores for [http://www.metacritic.com/games/platforms/ps2/goldeneyerogueagent?q=goldeneye%20rogue%20agent PlayStation 2], [http://www.metacritic.com/games/platforms/cube/goldeneyerogueagent?q=goldeneye%20rogue%20agent GameCube] and [http://www.metacritic.com/games/platforms/xbx/goldeneyerogueagent?q=goldeneye%20rogue%20agent Xbox] versions of ''GoldenEye: Rogue Agent''; and was criticised for using the &quot;GoldenEye&quot; name in an attempt to sell the game by riding on the success of Rare's game.;;;;;;;;

In the aftermath of E3 2006 Activision obtained the rights for James Bond games from MGM and EON,;; and a &quot;next-gen&quot; game is currently in the works by subsidiary Treyarch.;[http://www.gamespot.com/news/6154103.html Treyarch has 007's next-gen number], GameSpot, 14-07-2006;

The President of Nintendo of America, Reggie Fils-Aime, announced that Nintendo is exploring the possibility of adding ''GoldenEye 007'' to the Wii Virtual Console, despite a complicated situation in which the game's developer Rare is owned by Microsoft (producers of the rival Xbox 360 console) and the video game rights to the James Bond franchise are held by Activision. He stated, &quot;We would love to see it [on the Virtual Console], so we're exploring all the rights issues.&quot;; Summary of article available at &quot;[http://www.n-europe.com/news.php?nid=9822 N-Europe: News: Reggie Discusses Wii's Future]&quot;.;

Notes


External links
*[http://www.zoonami.com/briefing/2004-09-02.php The Making of ''GoldenEye 007''] Speech given by game designer Martin Hollis to the European Developer's Forum
* 
*
*
*[http://www.gamerankings.com/htmlpages2/197462.asp ''GoldenEye 007''] at Game Rankings




Category:1997 video games
Category:Cancelled Super NES games
Category:First-person shooters
Category:Interactive Achievement Award winners
Category:James Bond video games
Category:Nintendo 64 games
Category:Rareware games

de:GoldenEye 007
es:GoldenEye 007
fr:GoldenEye 007
nl:GoldenEye 007
ja:ゴールデンアイ 007
pl:GoldenEye 007
pt:GoldenEye 007
simple:Goldeneye 007 (video game)
fi:GoldenEye 007
sv:GoldenEye 007