
;;;;;;Integral:;;;;;Microsoft Windows:;;
|genre = Stealth action
|modes = Single-player
|ratings = ESRB: Mature (M);CERO: 15+;ELSPA: 15+ ;OFLC: M15+
|platforms = PlayStation, Microsoft Windows, GameCube
|media = 2 CD-ROMs
|requirements = Pentium II 233 MHz CPU, 32 MB RAM, 4 MB video card, DirectX v. 7.0A;;
|input = PlayStation controller (standard or DualShock), keyboard
}}


 is a stealth game directed by Hideo Kojima.;; The game was developed by Konami Computer Entertainment Japan and first published by Konami in 1998 for the PlayStation video game console. It was well-received publicly and critically, shipping more than six million copies;; and scoring an average of 94% in the review tallying website Metacritic's aggregate.;; It is the third title to be released in the ''Metal Gear'' series and a direct sequel to ''Metal Gear 2: Solid Snake''.

''Metal Gear Solid'';';s story centers on Solid Snake, a retired soldier who infiltrates a nuclear weapons disposal facility to neutralize the terrorist threat from FOXHOUND, a renegade special forces unit.;Colonel Campbell: Next-Generation Special Forces led by members of unit FOX-HOUND. They've presented Washington with a single demand, and they say that if it isn't met, they'll launch a nuclear weapon. (''Metal Gear Solid'', Briefing Mode) Konami Computer Entertainment Japan West, 1998; He attempts to liberate their two hostages, the head of DARPA and the president of a major arms manufacturer, and stops the terrorists from launching a nuclear strike.;Colonel Campbell: You'll have two mission objectives. First, you're to rescue the DARPA Chief, Donald Anderson, and the president of ArmsTech, Kenneth Baker. They're both being held as hostages. Secondly, you're to investigate whether or not the terrorists have the ability to launch a nuclear strike, and stop them if they do. (''Metal Gear Solid'', introductory sequence) Konami Computer Entertainment Japan West, 1998; Snake also confronts and defeats members of FOXHOUND.;Colonel Campbell: And finally, in charge of them, FOX-HOUND's squad leader Liquid Snake. // Solid Snake: Liquid Snake?! // Campbell: The man with the same codename as you… // Snake: I have a twin? // Campbell: I don't know the details, but it seems so. (''Metal Gear Solid'', Briefing Mode) Konami Computer Entertainment Japan West, 1998;

The commercial success of the title prompted ''Metal Gear Solid'' to be enhanced and re-released on PlayStation,; and Windows PC under the name ''Metal Gear Solid#Integral/VR Missions|Metal Gear Solid: Integral''; a remake, ''Metal Gear Solid: The Twin Snakes'', was later released for the Nintendo GameCube.;; The game has also spawned sequels and spin-offs. A PlayStation 2 sequel, ''Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty'', was followed by two prequels — ''Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater'' and ''Metal Gear Solid: Portable Ops'' — on the PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable respectively. Game Boy Color spin-off ''Metal Gear: Ghost Babel|Ghost Babel'' was joined by ''Metal Gear Acid'' and ''Metal Gear Acid 2'', both on the PlayStation Portable.; Another home console title, ''Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots'', is dated for release on the PlayStation 3 in the second quarter of 2008.;;

Gameplay
200 px|Solid Snake hiding from a guard 

Despite graphical improvements, ''Metal Gear Solid'';;'s gameplay remains similar to its MSX#MSX 2|MSX2 predecessor ''Metal Gear 2: Solid Snake''. The player must navigate the protagonist Solid Snake through the game's areas without being detected;; — detection sets off an alarm, which draws armed enemies to his location. To return to a lower alert setting, the player must hide, and remain undetected by the enemy until a timer reaches zero.;;

To remain undetected, the player can perform techniques which make use of Solid Snake's abilities and the environment, such as crawling under objects, using boxes as cover, ducking or hiding around walls, and making noise to distract the enemy. These are carried out using the Third-person shooter|third-person camera; which slowly changes its angle to give the player the best strategic view of the area possible, and an on-screen radar, which displays enemy personnel and their field of vision.;; Solid Snake is armed with many items and gadgets, such as thermal goggles and a cardboard box disguise.;; This emphasis on stealth promotes a less violent form of gameplay — firefights against large enemy teams will likely result in heavy damage and possible death for the protagonist.;;

Intermixed with the player's progress are plot-progressing cut scenes and radio conversations as well as encounters with boss characters. To progress, players must discover weaknesses of these enemies (such as attack patterns) to defeat them. This is where the player will most often use the game's weapon-set, ranging from pistols to Shoulder-launched missile weapon|rocket launchers and hand grenades.; Game controls and play strategies can also be accessed via the Codec radio, where advice is delivered from Snake's support crew as if the character were playing the video game; for example, the support team may chastise Snake for not saving his progress often enough, or explain his combat moves in terms of which buttons to press on the gamepad. Completion of the title provides the player with a statistical summary of their performance, and a &quot;code name&quot; based upon it, typically the common name of an animal.

In a first for the ''Metal Gear'' series, a training mode is available in which players can practice hiding techniques, weapons use, and sneaking.;; In addition to the stealth gameplay, there are set-piece sequences that entail firefights between the player and the enemy from the third-person and first-person perspectives.;

Story

=Characters=

''Metal Gear Solids protagonist is Solid Snake (voiced by Akio Ōtsuka in Japanese and David Hayter in English), a legendary infiltrator and saboteur. During the mission, Snake receives support and advice via radio. Colonel List of recurring Metal Gear characters#Roy Campbell|Roy Campbell (Takeshi Aono and Paul Eiding), Solid Snake's former commanding officer, supports with mission advice and battle tactics. Campbell is joined by List of Metal Gear Solid characters#Naomi Hunter|Naomi Hunter (Hiromi Tsuru and Jennifer Hale), who gives medical advice; List of Metal Gear Solid characters#Nastasha Romanenko|Nastasha Romanenko (Eiko Yamada and Renee Raudman), who provides item and weapon tips; and List of recurring Metal Gear characters#Mei Ling|Mei Ling (Houko Kuwashima and Kim Mai Guest), who saves the player's progress onto a memory card.;;

The main antagonist of the game is List of recurring Metal Gear characters#Liquid Snake|Liquid Snake (Banjo Ginga and Cam Clarke), leader of FOXHOUND, and genetic counterpart to Solid Snake.; An elite special forces unit, FOXHOUND contains experts specializing in unique tasks. Members are Revolver Ocelot, a Western-style gunslinger and expert interrogator whose weapon of choice is the Colt Single Action Army; List of Metal Gear Solid characters#Sniper Wolf|Sniper Wolf, a preternatural sniper; List of Metal Gear Solid characters#Vulcan Raven|Vulcan Raven, a hulking Alaskan mystic armed with an M61 Vulcan torn from a downed F-16; List of Metal Gear Solid characters#Psycho Mantis|Psycho Mantis, a psychic profiler and psychokinesis expert; and List of Metal Gear Solid characters#Decoy Octopus|Decoy Octopus, a disguise expert.;

Other characters include List of recurring Metal Gear characters#Meryl Silverburgh|Meryl Silverburgh (Kyoko Terase and Debi Mae West), the niece/daughter of Roy Campbell; List of recurring Metal Gear characters#Otacon|Dr. Hal &quot;Otacon&quot; Emmerich (Hideyuki Tanaka and Christopher Randolph), the lead developer of Metal Gear (weapon)#Metal Gear REX|Metal Gear REX; and Cyborg Ninja (Gray Fox/Frank Jaeger) (Kaneto Shiozawa and Greg Eagles), a mysterious cybernetically-enhanced agent who is neither an ally nor an enemy of Snake but clearly opposes FOXHOUND.;

=Plot=
Solid Snake in battle against Metal Gear REX
In 2005 (six years ;after the events of ''Metal Gear 2: Solid Snake''),;; FOXHOUND and the genetically-enhanced Next-Generation Special Forces unit lead an armed uprising at Shadow Moses, a remote isle located in Alaska's Fox Archipelago and the site of a nuclear weapons disposal facility.; In the process, they acquire Metal Gear REX, a nuclear-capable bipedal tank, threatening the U.S. government with a nuclear reprisal if they do not receive the remains of the &quot;legendary mercenary&quot; Big Boss.;; Solid Snake, in retirement at Alaska's Twin Lakes,;Snake: Colonel, I don't work for the government anymore. Let me go back to Twin Lakes. ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; is forcibly dispatched at the request of Colonel Roy Campbell to penetrate the terrorist defenses and neutralize the threat.;;

Solid Snake first locates hostage List of Metal Gear Solid characters#Donald Anderson|Donald Anderson, the DARPA chief. After he informs Snake of Metal Gear REX's deactivation procedure,;DARPA chief: … you can just insert the card keys and engage the safety lock Snake: And if I do that? DARPA chief: Yes. You can stop the launch ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; he mysteriously dies of what appears to be a heart attack.;Master Miller: The cause of death. Didn't the ArmsTech president and the DARPA Chief, I mean Decoy Octopus,… die of something that looked like a heart attack? ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; Following a brief encounter with Meryl Silverburgh, who aids their escape from the base prison, Snake continues on to find the other hostage, ArmsTech president List of Metal Gear Solid characters#Kenneth Baker|Kenneth Baker. He is used as bait by Revolver Ocelot, and Snake is challenged to a gunfight, interrupted by the arrival of a mysterious cyborg ninja who severs Ocelot's arm before escaping. Snake is again briefed on the Metal Gear project by Baker; much like the DARPA Chief, he dies of a sudden heart attack just before revealing key information. 

Snake then contacts Meryl via Codec, and agrees to meet her in the base's warhead disposal area on the condition he contact Metal Gear's designer, Hal &quot;Otacon&quot; Emmerich. While searching for him, he encounters the giant Vulcan Raven in an M1 Abrams tank, which he swiftly disables, and locates Otacon in his lab. The cyborg ninja Snake previously encountered reappears, and after a hand-to-hand battle reveals himself to be Solid Snake's former ally List of recurring Metal Gear characters#Gray Fox|Gray Fox, who Snake believed he had killed years earlier. Before they can settle their score, the ninja vanishes again. Otacon, while safe, is unaware that Metal Gear is to be used as a nuclear delivery system, and breaks down when Snake informs him that he is continuing his family's close involvement with the US nuclear program. He agrees to aid Snake remotely, using special camouflage to procure information and supplies while remaining unseen. Snake then meets Meryl, and they discuss their differing roles as soldiers- Meryl having joined the military to feel closer to her father, an Army officer killed in action. Ultimately he allows her to accompany him on his mission. Their reunion is brief, and after being telepathically coerced by Psycho Mantis to attack Snake,;Naomi: It's Psycho Mantis. He's controlling Meryl. That tune is his mind control music. ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; after defeating Psycho Mantis, Sniper Wolf ambushes them, wounding and capturing Meryl and eventually Snake following a sniper's duel.

While imprisoned, Liquid confirms Snake's suspicion that they are twin brothers.;Liquid: Were both the last surviving sons of Big Boss…;He hands Snake over to Ocelot, who tortures him,;Liquid: (to Ocelot) We're shorthanded, so make this little torture show of yours as short as possible. ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; but Snake quickly escapes, and after being chased to the top of the base's Communications Tower, he encounters Liquid again, in a Mil Mi-24|Hind-D attack helicopter. Despite being outgunned, Snake shoots it down,;Snake: Oh, I had to take out that helicopter. ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; and upon descending the tower is yet again ambushed by Sniper Wolf, and kills her following a second duel. Otacon, enamored with her, is overwhelmed with grief, but continues to assist Snake.

Snake descends into the bowels of the Shadow Moses facility, first cutting through the base forge then down into the warehouses below. Here he encounters Raven again, this time face-to-face, and kills him. Before he dies, Raven reveals that the DARPA Chief who Snake encountered was actually FOXHOUND member Decoy Octopus in disguise.;Raven: That was not the DARPA Chief. It was Decoy Octopus. ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; Shortly after, Master Miller calls and reveals that Dr Naomi Hunter, a support agent, had given Solid Snake the genetically engineered virus &quot;FoxDie&quot; during his mission preparations, and is sending coded messages into the facility- Campbell swiftly orders her arrest. The virus, designed to kill people with particular genetic markers via cardiac arrest,;Master Miller: Snake, have you ever heard of something called &quot;Fox Die&quot;? It's some kind of virus that targets specific people. ''(Metal Gear Solid)'';;Master Miller: Snake, try to remember. Did Naomi give you some kind of injection? She was in the best position to have done it, but I don't know what her motive was. ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; was responsible for the deaths of Octopus and the Armstech president.;Master Miller: Didn't the ArmsTech president and the DARPA Chief, I mean Decoy Octopus,… die of something that looked like a heart attack? Well, apparently Fox Die kills its victims by simulating a heart attack. ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; Naomi, struck by guilt, contacts Snake in secret and confesses that she joined the mission to sabotage it, as she is the adoptive sister of the now barely human Gray Fox. However, upon learning of Snake's own tragic past through the current mission, she no longer has the heart to kill him directly, having reprogrammed the virus.;Naomi Hunter You killed my benefactor and sent my brother home a cripple. ''(Metal Gear Solid)'';

Infiltrating Metal Gear's hangar and following the supposed procedure to disarm the warhead, Snake unknowingly activates Metal Gear REX,;Computer: PAL code number three confirmed. PAL code entry complete… ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; after which Master Miller reveals himself to be Liquid in disguise. He informs Snake that his entire mission was manipulated by the renegades to allow the launch of the nuclear weapon.;Campbell: Snake, you've been talking to… Liquid: …Me… dear brother. ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; As a parting gift as he boards REX, Liquid explains that they are the product of the 1972 Les Enfants Terribles project, a government sponsored effort to clone legendary mercenary Big Boss. However, part of the process requires that their genes be altered, Solid receiving all of Big Boss' dominant genes, and Liquid receiving all the recessive genes.;It is for this purpose that we were created! Snake: Created? Liquid: Yes, created, Les Enfantes Terrible…the terrible children. Clones of Big Boss;;Snake: You mean you had this planned from the beginning? Just to get me to input the detonation code? ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; 

Drawn into battle with Metal Gear REX, Snake manages to disable the machine's sensors with the aid of Otacon, and Gray Fox (who admits to being &quot;Deepthroat&quot;) manages to destroy its radome, but is wounded and crushed by its foot. REX is destroyed, but Liquid survives, challenging Snake to a final fist-fight atop Metal Gear, where Snake succeeds and is reunited with Meryl- possibly for the final time, depending on the player's actions (see below). After a protracted jeep-chase with the seemingly unkillable Liquid, Snake finally escapes the facility, and his brother collapses, killed by FoxDie.;Snake: Naomi, Liquid died from Fox Die too. ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; Colonel Campbell, briefly ousted from command of the mission, calls off a nuclear airstrike intended to obliterate the evidence of the day's events, and officially declares Snake killed in action to prevent the US Government returning for him in the future. In the immediate aftermath, the player finds out Snake is actually genetically inferior to Liquid;Ocelot: Until the very end, Liquid thought he was the inferior one. ''(Metal Gear Solid)''; and has an indeterminate amount of time left before FoxDie kills him.;Ocelot: The vector? Yes sir, FoxDie should become activated soon… ''(Metal Gear Solid)'';

Depending on the player's actions during the game, there are two possible endings: in one ending, Ocelot kills Meryl and Snake escapes with Otacon, while in the other ending, she survives and escapes with Snake. Meryl's survival is recorded as canon by ''In The Darkness of Shadow Moses'', a story featured in ''Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty''. A telephone conversation following the credits reveals Ocelot to be a double agent for the President of the United States, the &quot;third&quot;, Solidus_Snake#Solidus_Snake|Solidus. Ocelot's intention was to gain Baker's disk containing Metal Gear's specifications and deliver it to the president.

Development
Development for ''Metal Gear Solid'' began in 1995;; with the intent of creating the &quot;best PlayStation game ever.&quot;; Developers aimed for accuracy and realism while making the game enjoyable and tense. In the early stages of development, a SWAT team educated the creators with a demonstration of vehicles, weapons and explosives.;; Hideo Kojima, the director, stated that &quot;if the player isn't tricked into believing that the world is real, then there's no point in making the game&quot;. To fulfill this, adjustments were made to every detail, such as individually designed desks.;;

The characters of ''Metal Gear Solid'' were created by Hideo Kojima; modifications and mechanics were made by conceptual artist Yoji Shinkawa. The characters were completed by polygonal artists using pencil drawings and clay models by Shinkawa.;; 

Despite being the third ''Metal Gear'' title (not including the non-canonical ''Snake's Revenge''), Kojima chose the name ''Metal Gear Solid'' over ''Metal Gear 3'' due to the relative obscurity of the first two games. The word ''Solid'' refers to the game being the third installment in the series, and also because the game uses 3D computer graphics.;; The subsequent sequels in the series also bear the ''Metal Gear Solid'' title, following a new numeral progression.

Hideo Kojima wanted greater interaction with objects and the environment, such as allowing the player to hide bodies in a storage compartment. Additionally, he wanted &quot;a full orchestra right next to the player&quot;; a system which made modifications (such as tempo and texture) to the currently playing track, instead of switching to another pre-recorded track. Although these features could not be achieved, they were implemented in ''Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty''.;;

''Metal Gear Solid'' was revealed to the public at the E3 gaming event in 1997 as a short video. It was later playable for the first time at the Tokyo Game Show in 1998 and officially released the same year in Japan;;; with an extensive promotional campaign.; Television and magazine advertisements, in-store samples, and demo give-aways contributed to a total of US$8 million in promotional costs.;; An estimated 12 million demos for the game were distributed during 1998.;;;

=Localization and re-releases=
The English version of ''Metal Gear Solid'' (translated by Jeremy Blaustein); contains minor refinements made during localization, such as adjustable difficulty settings, alternative outfits, and a &quot;demo theater&quot; for viewing cut scenes and radio conversations.;;

Some countries in the PAL region received a version of the game dubbed into their language, including Spanish, German, French and Italian. Most PAL versions feature an &quot;Extreme&quot; mode which introduces restrictions such as extended guard vision.; A premium package was released in Japan and the PAL region.;;;;;

''Integral'', ''VR Missions'' and ''Special Missions''
The cover of ''Metal Gear Solid: Integral''

Released on June 25, 1999 in Japan,;; ''Metal Gear Solid: Integral'' is an international version with additional features and an extra disc of additional missions (established as virtual training).; New features included costumes, the &quot;Very Easy&quot; difficulty level and three game modes, one using the PocketStation. A Windows PC port of ''Integral'' was also released in Europe and North America in late 2000 with PocketStation support removed.;;;;; Scoring 83 in Metacritic's aggregate, the game was criticized for &quot;graphic glitches&quot;, the aged nature of the port, and being essentially identical to the PlayStation version.;;

The extra-missions disc from ''Integral'' was released as an expansion pack outside of Japan — in North America as ''Metal Gear Solid: VR Missions''; (September 23, 1999) and in the PAL region as ''Metal Gear Solid: Special Missions'' (October 29, 1999).;; ''VR Missions'' features training missions testing the player's sneaking and fighting skill, as well as less conventional tests, such as murder-mysteries, battling giant genome soldiers, and a mode allowing the player to control the Cyborg Ninja. It includes trailers for ''Metal Gear Solid'', a preview artwork of Metal Gear (weapon)#Metal Gear RAY|Metal Gear RAY from ''Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty'' and a &quot;photo shoot&quot; mode to take pictures of Mei Ling and Naomi.;;

''The Twin Snakes''

An enhanced remake of ''Metal Gear Solid'', titled ''Metal Gear Solid: The Twin Snakes'' was developed by Silicon Knights under the direction of Hideo Kojima and released for the Nintendo GameCube in North America, Japan, and Europe in March 2004.;; While ''Twin Snakes'' was largely developed at Silicon Knights, its cut scenes were developed in-house at Konami and directed by Japanese film director Ryuhei Kitamura, reflecting his dynamic signature style, utilizing bullet-time photography and choreographed gunplay extensively.;; While the storyline and settings of the game were unchanged, a variety of gameplay features from ''Sons of Liberty'' were added such as the first person aiming and hanging from bars on walls. The graphics were also updated.;;

Comic &amp; ''Digital Graphic Novel''
Image:Mgscomix_screen007.jpg|300px|right|thumb|A screenshot from the ''Digital Graphic Novel'' illustrating its artistic style. Here we see Revolver Ocelot (first three panels) conversing with Solid Snake (final panel)
In September 2004, IDW Publications began publishing a series of ''Metal Gear Solid'' comics,;; written by Kris Oprisko and illustrated by Ashley Wood.;; As of 2006, 12 issues have been published, fully covering the Metal Gear Solid storyline.;; The comic mimics Yoji Shinkawa's gritty style using a palette of grays and rough, sketchy paintings as panels.

Announced in January 2006, ''Metal Gear Solid: Digital Graphic Novel'' is an interactive comic for the PlayStation Portable.;; Based on the ''Metal Gear Solid'' comic book adaptation, it features visual enhancements and two interactive modes designed to give further insight into the publication.;; Upon viewing the pages, the player can open a &quot;scanning&quot; interface to search for characters and items in a three dimensional view.; Discoveries are added to a database which can be traded with other players via Wi-Fi. The &quot;mission mode&quot; allows the player to add collected information into a library. This information must be properly connected to complete a mission. ''Metal Gear Solid: Digital Graphic Novel'' was released in North America on June 13, 2006, Japan on September 21 and the PAL region on September 22.;; In 2006, the game received IGN's award for Best Use of Sound on the PSP.;;

Other media
The ''Metal Gear Solid Drama CD'' is a Japanese radio drama continuation of ''Metal Gear Solid''. Directed by Shuyo Murata and written by Motosada Mori, it aired, in 18 segments, from 1998 to 1999 on Konami's ''CLUB db'' program. The series was later released on two separate CDs.;;;; Set after the events of Shadow Moses, Solid Snake, Meryl Silverburgh, Roy Campbell and Mei Ling pursue missions in hostile third world nations as FOXHOUND. Characters not seen in ''Metal Gear Solid'' are introduced, such as Sgt. Allen Iishiba (voiced by Toshio Furukawa), a Delta Force operative who assists Snake and Meryl; Col. Mark Cortez (v.b. Osamu Saka), an old friend of Campbell who commands the fictional Esterian Special Forces; and Capt. Sergei Ivanovich (v.b. Kazuhiro Nakata), a former war buddy of Revolver Ocelot.

Music

''Metal Gear Solid'';';s musical score was composed by in-house musicians at Konami, including Kazuki Muraoka, who also worked on ''Metal Gear''.;; Composer and lyricist Rika Muranaka provided a song called &quot;The Best is Yet To Come&quot;;; for the game's ending credits sequence.;; The song is performed in Irish by Aoife Ní Fhearraigh.;; The main theme was composed by TAPPY.;;
Music played in-game has a synthetic feel with increased pace and introduction of strings during tense moments, with a looping style endemic to video games. Overtly cinematic music, with stronger orchestral and choral elements, appears in cutscenes. The soundtrack was released on September 23, 1998, under the King Records label.;;

Reception
''Metal Gear Solid'' was a commercial success, shipping over 6 million copies worldwide.; Upon release, it was one of the most rented games,;; and topped sales charts in the United Kingdom.;; The game was generally well-received by the media, and was given high scores by some of the most prominent gaming critics. Gaming website IGN awarded the &quot;incredible&quot; rating of 9.8/10,;; and the GamePro website gave it a score of 5/5 in the site's retro feature.;; GameSpot granted a lower rating of 8.5/10, calling it &quot;revolutionary&quot; but criticizing its short length and low difficulty.;; It received an Excellence Award for Interactive Art at the 1998 Japan Media Arts Festival.;;

''Electronic Gaming Monthly'' awarded ''Metal Gear Solid'' the unprecedented Platinum Award (four perfect scores of 10), and it was the first game they gave this award to.;; IGN editors ranked ''Metal Gear Solid'' as the best PlayStation game ever, and gave it the &quot;Best Ending&quot; and &quot;Best Villain&quot; awards.;;

''Metal Gear Solid'' has appeared in many &quot;best games of all time&quot; lists. In September 2004, ''PSM'' ranked it #1 on its &quot;Final Playstation Top 10&quot; list in honor of the Sony PlayStation selling 100 million units. [http://forums.gametrailers.com/archive/index.php/t-1940.html ref] In 2005, IGN editors placed it 19th out of the &quot;Top 100 Games&quot;,;; while the readers voted it to 9th place.;; Members of GameFAQs ranked it the 8th best,;; and readers of Japanese magazine ''Famitsu'' ranked it 50th in a 2006 poll.;; It also placed 23rd in ''Entertainment Weekly'';';s list,;; and 17th in both ''Electronic Gaming Monthly'';';s;; and ''Game Informer'';';s lists.;; In 2005, ''GamePro'' ranked ''Metal Gear Solid'' first in their list of &quot;10 Modern Classics Every Gamer Should Own.&quot;;;

References


External links

* [http://www.konami.jp/gs/game/metalgear/ ''Metal Gear Solid'' official site] 
* 
* 
* [http://www.konami-europe.com/ Konami Europe]
* [http://www.konami.com/ Konami America]



Category:1998 video games
Category:Comics based on video games
Category:Hideo Kojima games
Category:Japanese radio drama|Metal Gear Solid Drama CD
Category:Metal Gear games
Category:PlayStation games
Category:Stealth video games
Category:Windows games
Category:Terrorism in fiction



ca:Metal Gear Solid
de:Metal Gear#Metal Gear Solid
es:Metal Gear Solid
fr:Metal Gear Solid
hr:Metal Gear Solid
it:Metal Gear Solid (videogioco)
ja:メタルギアソリッド
pl:Metal Gear Solid
pt:Metal Gear Solid
ru:Metal Gear Solid
fi:Metal Gear Solid
sv:Metal Gear Solid
tr:Metal Gear Solid
zh:潛龍諜影