

The 1995 Pacific hurricane season was the least active Pacific hurricane season since 1979.;; Of the eleven tropical cyclones that formed during the season, four affected land, with the most notable storm of the season being Hurricane Ismael, which killed at least 116&amp;nbsp;people in Mexico. The strongest hurricane in the season was Hurricane Juliette, which reached peak winds of 150&amp;nbsp;mph (240&amp;nbsp;km/h).

The season officially started on May 15, 1995 in the eastern Pacific, and on June 1, 1995 in the central Pacific, and lasted until November 30, 1995. These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean. The season saw eleven tropical cyclones form, of which ten became tropical storms. Seven storms attained hurricane status, of which three acquired Tropical cyclone#Major hurricane|major hurricane status. The number of tropical storms was much less than the average of 16 storms, while the number of hurricanes and major hurricanes were slightly below average.;;

Season summary
Tropical Depression Erick (left) and Tropical Storm Flossie (bottom-center) on August 7
The seasonal activity during 1995 was below normal, and marked the first of several seasons with lower than normal activity, a trend that would persist until the following decade.; Four tropical cyclones affected Mexico: first, Hurricane Flossie passed within 75&amp;nbsp;miles (120&amp;nbsp;km) of Baja California, producing moderate winds and killing seven people. Afterwards, Tropical Storm Gil dropped heavy rainfall in southern Mexico early in its life, though caused no damage; Hurricane Henriette later made landfall near Cabo San Lucas with winds of 100&amp;nbsp;mph (160&amp;nbsp;km/h), resulting in moderate damage but no deaths. Finally, Ismael struck the state of Sinaloa as a minimal hurricane. Offshore, fishermen were caught off guard by the hurricane, causing 57 of them to drown. On land, Ismael destroyed thousands of houses, leaving 30,000 homeless and killing another 59. Both Hurricanes Flossie and Ismael also produced moisture and localized damage in southwestern United States.;;

Activity in the Central Pacific Ocean was below active as well. No tropical storms formed in the basin, the first time in four years.; Barbara was the only tropical cyclone to exist within the basin, but it formed in the Eastern Pacific. It entered as a weakening tropical storm, and quickly dissipated, without affecting land.;; It was the least activity in the basin since 1979, when the basin was completely quiet, as no storms entered the basin that year.;

Storms
Eleven tropical cyclones, including one tropical depression that failed to attain tropical storm status, developed in the Eastern Pacific Ocean in 1995.

=Tropical Depression One-E=


A westward moving tropical wave entered the Pacific Ocean in Mid-May. Convection within the disturbance became more concentrated and organized on May 19 while the wave was located a short distance south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec.;; The deep convection concentrated around a low-level circulation with expanding outflow, and the system developed into Tropical Depression One-E on May 21,;; while located about 400&amp;nbsp;miles (645&amp;nbsp;km) south of Manzanillo, Mexico.; Initially the depression was forecasted to strengthen to reach winds of 55&amp;nbsp;mph (90&amp;nbsp;km/h) as it moved westward under the influence of a high pressure system to its north.; Outflow increased as the storm moved through an area of warm waters and a favorable upper-level environment, and two satellite classifications indicated the system was at tropical storm status around nine hours after forming.;; Despite the favorable environment and satellite classifications of tropical storm status, the depression failed to organize further.;; The convection and organization continued to decrease, and on May 23 the depression dissipated.;

=Hurricane Adolph=

An area of disturbed weather associated with a tropical wave organized off the southwest coast of Mexico during the middle of June.;; Banding features developed as a circulation persisted on the northeast side of its deep convection, and the system developed into Tropical Depression Two-E on June 15.;; Under weak steering currents, the depression moved slowly northward, and with deep convection organizing near its center, the depression intensified to Tropical Storm Adolph on June 16. Located in an area of warm waters, Adolph exhibited a well-defined outflow pattern, and rapidly strengthened to attain hurricane status on June 17 as a banding-type eye developed. Hurricane Adolph turned to the northwest and attained major hurricane status late that same day. The small eye of the hurricane continued to organize, as very deep convection surrounded the eyewall, and Adolph reached its peak intensity of 135&amp;nbsp;mph (215&amp;nbsp;km/h) on June 18, making it a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale|Saffir-Simpson scale. Shortly thereafter, the storm weakened, as the upper-level environment became more hostile, and the system moved over progressively cooler waters. On June 19, Adolph turned to the west, and degenerated back into a tropical storm later that day. On June 20, the storm weakened to a tropical depression, and on June 21, Adolph began to dissipate as its center became devoid of deep convection.;

As Adolph moved north towards Mexico while about 290&amp;nbsp;miles (465&amp;nbsp;km) off the coast, the Mexican government issued a tropical storm warning and a hurricane watch from Punta Tejupan to Cabo Corrientes. When the storm turned to the northwest and later to the west, the government discontinued the warnings as it was determined the storm would not be a threat to land. No damage or casualties were reported.;

=Hurricane Barbara=

A few days later, on June 24, another weak tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa. It moved steadily westward through the Atlantic Ocean without any development, and entered the eastern Pacific Ocean on July 5. At this point, convection developed along the wave axis, and the system gradually organized. A circulation developed;; as it passed through an area of warm waters, and the system developed into Tropical Depression Three-E on July 7, while located about 600&amp;nbsp;miles (965&amp;nbsp;km) south of Manzanillo, Colima.;; Although the outer rainbands warmed slightly in the hours after the formation, the convection near the center deepened further with favorable upper-level outflow,;; and the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Barbara early on July 8. Barbara steadily intensified,; and following the development of a ragged eye that night,;; Barbara strengthened into a hurricane on July 9, while located about 700&amp;nbsp;miles (1130&amp;nbsp;km) south of the southern tip of Baja California.;

After moving into an area of light vertical shear and warm water temperatures,;; Barbara quickly intensified to reach Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale|major hurricane status on July 10. The eye continued to become better organized, and Barbara attained winds of 135&amp;nbsp;mph (215&amp;nbsp;km/h) later on the 10th. After maintaining its intensity for 24&amp;nbsp;hours,; increased wind shear from an upper-tropospheric trough degraded the appearance of the deepest convection, and the eye became obscured from satellite images.;; After weakening to a 115&amp;nbsp;mph (185&amp;nbsp;km/h) hurricane, Barbara maintained its intensity for 30&amp;nbsp;hours before moving into an area with very warm waters and a favorable upper-level environment. On July 13, the hurricane re-organized, a distinct eye again developed, and Barbara strengthened to reach its peak intensity of 140&amp;nbsp;mph (225&amp;nbsp;km/h) later that day. Barbara continued westward under the influence of a subtropical ridge to its north, and began to steadily weaken on July 14 as it moved into an area of cooler water temperatures. The hurricane degraded to a tropical storm on July 16, and a day later it deteriorated to a tropical depression. As a depression with little to no convection near its center, Barbara continued west-northwestward until dissipating on July 18 while located 720&amp;nbsp;miles (1160&amp;nbsp;km) east-southeast of Hilo, Hawai'i. Barbara remained away from land for its entire lifetime, and it did not cause any damage or deaths.;

=Hurricane Cosme=

As Barbara moved away from land, another area of disturbed weather moved off the coast of Central America on July 11. Moving westward, this area slowly organized, and developed a low-level circulation on July 15.;; The convection developed into curved rainbands, and based on Dvorak classifications of 35&amp;nbsp;mph (55&amp;nbsp;km/h), the National Hurricane Center estimated that the system developed into Tropical Depression Four-E on July 17, while located about 400&amp;nbsp;miles (645&amp;nbsp;km) south-southeast of the southern tip of Baja California. As the depression was situated in an area with warm waters and moderate upper-level outflow, the system was forecast to slowly intensify to a 50&amp;nbsp;mph (80&amp;nbsp;km/h) tropical storm.;; Initially, the depression followed the forecasts, and it intensified into a tropical storm about 30&amp;nbsp;hours after developing, receiving the name &quot;''Cosme''&quot;.; Cosme was expected to strengthen only slightly due to predicted cooler waters and increased shear.;;

On July 18, contrary to the predictions, Cosme became much better organized, and well-defined banding features were visible on satellite imagery.;; The storm continued to steadily intensify, and subsequent to the development of an eye, Cosme strengthened into a hurricane late on July 19, while located 380&amp;nbsp;miles (615&amp;nbsp;km) west-southwest of the southern tip of Baja California.;; After maintaining hurricane status for 18 hours, Cosme weakened back to a tropical storm on July 20.; Cooler water temperatures deteriorated the convection near the center, resulting in Cosme quickly weakening to a tropical depression on July 21.;; After turning to the west-southwest, Cosme dissipated on July 22. Cosme never affected land, and as a result caused no damage or fatalities. However, the intensity of the storm is still uncertain; late on the 18th, a ship 70&amp;nbsp;miles to the east of Cosme reported winds of 17&amp;nbsp;mph (27&amp;nbsp;km/h), despite that a normal 50&amp;nbsp;mph (80&amp;nbsp;km/h) tropical storm would produce tropical storm force winds for locations within at least 70&amp;nbsp;miles (110&amp;nbsp;km) of the center.;

=Tropical Storm Dalila=

A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on July 11. It moved westward and quickly developed two areas of convection along the wave axis. One of the areas nearly developed into a tropical depression after moving northwestward, though it failed to organize further and dissipated. The southern area continued westward and ultimately entered the eastern Pacific Ocean on July 21. Thunderstorms along the wave axis became more concentrated a few hundred miles south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec, and the system developed into Tropical Depression Five-E on July 24 while located 500&amp;nbsp;miles (800&amp;nbsp;km) southwest of Manzanillo, Mexico.;;

Located in an area of weak steering currents and easterly wind shear, the tropical depression drifted to the north-northeast while the convection was displaced up to 70&amp;nbsp;miles (110&amp;nbsp;km) west of the circulation. Slightly strengthening occurred, and on July 25 the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Dalila. The storm turned to the northwest, and later to the west-northwest, and remained a minimal tropical storm until July 28 when a decrease in wind shear allowed Dalila to strengthen. A strong anticyclone developed to the north of the system, causing Dalila to accelerate to the northwest. Late on July 28, Dalila reached a peak intensity of 65&amp;nbsp;mph (105&amp;nbsp;km/h) at a position 570&amp;nbsp;miles (915&amp;nbsp;km) southwest of Cabo San Lucas. Tropical Storm Dalila slowly weakened after moving over progressively cooler water temperatures, and on August 1 it degenerated into a tropical depression. Dalila turned to the southwest after much of the convection waned, and the system dissipated on August 2.;

=Tropical Storm Erick=

On July 17 a tropical wave exited the coast of Africa, and moved westward. An area of convection along the wave organized slightly on July 18, though the next day the convection diminished. After moving through the Windward Islands on July 23, deep convection again increased. The system failed to organize further, though convection continued to develop upon entering the eastern Pacific Ocean on July 27. The cloudiness and thunderstorms became more consolidated off the coast of southern Mexico, and on July 31 Dvorak classifications began on the system. A circulation developed, and the system organized into Tropical Depression Six-E on August 1 while located about 520&amp;nbsp;miles (835&amp;nbsp;km) south of the southern tip of Baja California.;;

Initially, the depression was a small system with moderate amounts of easterly wind shear.;; It organized slowly, and after moving to the southwest for 24 hours it turned to the northwest.; Subsequent to an increase in convection over the center, the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Erick on August 4.;; Erick gradually strengthened as it moved to the west-northwest, and reached peak winds of 65&amp;nbsp;mph (105&amp;nbsp;km/h) on August 5 while located about 720&amp;nbsp;miles (1160&amp;nbsp;km) southwest of Cabo San Lucas.; Operationally, the storm was forecasted to continue to strengthen to reach hurricane status, though this did not occur.;; The mid-level ridge which had been tracking Erick westward weakened, resulting in Erick to turn to the north over cooler waters. It quickly weakened to a tropical depression on August 6, and after turning to an eastward drift Erick dissipated on August 8 while located 700&amp;nbsp;miles (1130&amp;nbsp;km) west-southwest of the southern tip of Baja California. Erick never affected land.;

=Hurricane Flossie=

A large circulation with an area of low pressure persisted in the tropical eastern Pacific Ocean in early August. The large circulation was well-developed by August 7, and the convection concentrated a few hundred miles southwest of Acapulco. Low pressures persisted across the region, and based on its organization the National Hurricane Center designated the system Tropical Depression Seven-E later on the 7th. Based on reports from nearby ships, it is estimated the depression intensified to become Tropical Storm Flossie on August 8. The storm paralleled the coast of Mexico as it moved to the northwest at around 8 mph, and after a decrease of wind shear Flossie developed very deep convection over its center. It intensified into a hurricane on August 10, and shortly thereafter it reached its peak intensity of 80 mph as an embedded warm spot appeared in the center of the storm. After maintaining its peak intensity for 18 hours and passing within 75 miles of Baja California, Flossie weakened over cooler waters and degenerated to a tropical storm on August 12. The storm continued to weaken, and early on August 14 Flossie dissipated.;;

The government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning from Punta Tejupan to Cabo Corrientes early in its life, though it was discontinued shortly thereafter. Officials issued a tropical storm watch and later a tropical storm warning for Baja California Sur south of La Paz, which was later extended from Loreto on the east coast to San Juanico on the west coast. The large circulation of Hurricane Flossie produced gusty winds and heavy rainfall along the west coast of Mexico and southern Baja California. Cabo San Lucas reported sustained tropical storm force winds with a gust to 55&amp;nbsp;mph (90&amp;nbsp;km/h), while amateur radio reports in San Jose del Cabo recorded a gust of 65&amp;nbsp;mph (105&amp;nbsp;km/h). Seven people died in Mexico from the storm, including two that drowned in Cabo San Lucas.; The outer bands of the storm dropped more than 3&amp;nbsp;inches (75&amp;nbsp;mm) of rain in Tucson, Arizona, resulting in flash flooding at rush hour. A woman drove through a flooded roadway, and died after being swept into a small canyon. Eleven other motorists were stranded from the flooding. The storm produced a hail storm and a peak wind gust of 76&amp;nbsp;mph (122&amp;nbsp;km/h). Large portions of Tucson were left without power, while the strong winds resulted in shingle damage.;; Downed power lines and winds tore the roofs off of a few buildings. Damage from the storm in Arizona totaled to $5&amp;nbsp;million (1995&amp;nbsp;USD, $6.6&amp;nbsp;million 2006&amp;nbsp;USD), while damage in Mexico, if any, is unknown.;;

=Tropical Storm Gil=

An area of disturbed weather, possibly related to a tropical wave, persisted and gradually organized in the Gulf of Tehuantepec. A circulation developed within its deep convection, and the system organized into Tropical Depression Seven-E on August 19 while located about 115&amp;nbsp;miles (185&amp;nbsp;km) southeast of Acapulco.;; Operationally, it was not until 15&amp;nbsp;hours later that the National Hurricane Center initiated advisories on the system.;; The depression moved westward and quickly intensified into a tropical storm. A nearby ship confirmed the existence of tropical storm force winds, and Cosme reached winds of 50&amp;nbsp;mph (80&amp;nbsp;km/h) early on August 21.; With well-defined outflow and continually developing convection, forecasters predicted Gil to strengthen more and attain hurricane status within 2 days of becoming a tropical storm.;; However, increased northeasterly wind shear initially prevented further strengthening.;;

On August 22, the cloud pattern of Gil became better organized, though the low-level circulation was located to the northeast of the deep convection due to the wind shear.;; The shear also limited outflow to the east, preventing further strengthening. Gradually the convection developed nearer to the center.;; After Gil turned to the northwest, the deep convection organized into a eye (cyclone)#structure|central dense overcast, and it strengthened to reach winds of 60&amp;nbsp;mph (95&amp;nbsp;km/h) on August 24.;; Later that day the storm attained a peak strength of 65&amp;nbsp;mph (105&amp;nbsp;km/h) while located 380&amp;nbsp;miles (610&amp;nbsp;km) southwest of the southern tip of Baja California. After maintaining its peak strength for 30 hours, Gil moved over progressively cooler waters, and weakened to a tropical depression on August 26. The depression drifted westward and later turned to the north, and dissipated on August 27 while located 670&amp;nbsp;miles (1075&amp;nbsp;km) to the west of Cabo San Lucas.; While located a short distance off of Mexico, Gil produced heavy rainfall near the coast.; However, there were no reports of casualties or damages in association with the storm.;

=Hurricane Henriette=

A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 15. It traversed westward and entered the eastern Pacific Ocean on August 29. The system quickly developed deep convection and a low-level circulation, and on September 1 it organized into Tropical Depression Nine-E while located about 170&amp;nbsp;miles (270&amp;nbsp;km) off the southwest coast of Mexico. The depression initially moved west-northwestward, and shortly after forming it turned to the north-northwest. Under favorable conditions, the depression slowly strengthened to become Tropical Storm Henriette on September 2 while located 220&amp;nbsp;miles (350&amp;nbsp;km) west of Manzanillo.;; By later that day, the convection wrapped around the center of circulation.;; Henriette quickly organized and intensified into a hurricane on September 3 while located 135&amp;nbsp;miles (235&amp;nbsp;km) west-southwest of Puerto Vallarta in Jalisco.; Upon reaching hurricane status, one computer model predicted Henriette to continue moving northward through the Gulf of California, though most forecasted a turn to the northwest.;;

Late on September 3, an eye began to form in the center of the deep convection as Henriette turned to the northwest.;; The eye became better defined the next day, and Henriette attained a peak intensity of 100&amp;nbsp;mph (160&amp;nbsp;km/h) as the northern portion of the eyewall moved over southern Baja California. The hurricane quickly crossed the southern tip of Baja California and emerged into the Pacific Ocean again as a weakened 85&amp;nbsp;mph (135&amp;nbsp;km/h) cyclone with disrupted convection near the center.;; Convection gradually waned as the hurricane moved over progressively colder waters,;; and on September 6 Henriette weakened to a tropical depression. The storm turned to the west, and gradually weakened until dissipating on September 8.;

On September 2, a few hours after Henriette became a tropical storm, the government of Mexico issued a tropical storm watch for Baja California from La Paz southward. Early the next day it was changed to a hurricane watch, and 18 hours before Henriette made landfall the watch was upgraded to a hurricane warning. Early on September 4, the hurricane warning was extended northward to 25º N.; The threat of Hurricane Henriette prompted a Carnival Cruise Line ship to alter their route. Originally planned to tour Mexican ports, the captain turned the ship to tour the southern California coastline. Many upset passengers demanded refunds, to which the cruise line offered discounts for future cruises and a $40 credit card during their cruise.;; Winds of up to 100 mph in southern Baja California Sur left much of Cabo San Lucas without water or power.;; 2,000 people were directly affected by the hurricane.;; A strong storm surge produced flooding and heavy road damage in the state. 800 people were forced from their homes, and crop damage was reported. Based on estimates from satellite imagery, up to 10&amp;nbsp;inches (250&amp;nbsp;mm) of rain might have fallen on land. No damage estimates are available, and no deaths were reported.;

=Hurricane Ismael=


Hurricane Ismael developed from a persistent area of deep convection on September 12, and steadily strengthened as it moved to the north-northwest. Ismael attained hurricane status on September 14 while located 210&amp;nbsp;miles (340&amp;nbsp;km) off the coast of Mexico. It continued to the north, and after passing a short distance east of Baja California it made landfall on Topolobampo in the state of Sinaloa with winds of 80&amp;nbsp;mph (130&amp;nbsp;km/h). Ismael rapidly weakened over land, and dissipated on September 16 over northwestern Mexico. The remnants entered the United States and extended eastward into the Mid-Atlantic States.;;

Offshore, Ismael produced waves of up to 30&amp;nbsp;feet (9&amp;nbsp;m) in height. Hundreds of fishermen were unprepared by the hurricane, which was expected to move more slowly,;; and as a result 52 ships were wrecked, killing 57 fishermen.;; The hurricane destroyed thousands of houses, leaving 30,000 people homeless.;; On land, Ismael caused 59 casualties in mainland Mexico and resulted in $26&amp;nbsp;million in damage (1995&amp;nbsp;USD, $34.4&amp;nbsp;million 2006&amp;nbsp;USD).;; Moisture from the storm extended into the United States, causing heavy rainfall and localized moderate damage in southeastern New Mexico.;;

=Hurricane Juliette=

A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa behind Hurricane Luis on August 31. Strong outflow from Luis prevented development of the wave, and it continued westward until crossing into the eastern Pacific Ocean on September 12. Convection increased as it moved through the Gulf of Tehuantepec, and the cloud pattern organized sufficiently to warrant Dvorak classifications for the system on September 15. Based on the development of a low-level circulation, it is estimated the system organized into Tropical Depression Eleven-E on September 16 while located around 290&amp;nbsp;miles (465&amp;nbsp;km) south of Manzanillo, Mexico.;; Due to the tropical depression moving over an area of warm water temperatures with favorable upper level outflow, the National Hurricane Center forecasted the tropical depression to slowly intensify to 70&amp;nbsp;mph (110&amp;nbsp;km/h) winds within 72 hours the forecast early on September 16.;;

The tropical depression was small in size, with a diameter of central deep convection of 60 to 115&amp;nbsp;miles (95 to 185&amp;nbsp;km). Moving to the west-northwest, the depression intensified into a tropical storm on September 17.; Juliette quickly organized with a well-defined band of convection being drawn into the circulation.;; The storm quickly intensified, and subsequent to the development of a small eye Juliette attained hurricane status on September 18, just 42&amp;nbsp;hours after developing. The eye became better defined as the hurricane moved to the west-northwest, a motion caused by a weak ridge to its north, and Juliette attained major hurricane status early on September 19. Possibly due to increased northeastly wind shear from an upper-level trough, Juliette stopped its intensification trend on the 19th, though as it turned to the west it again re-organized. On September 20, while located 420&amp;nbsp;miles (680&amp;nbsp;km) southwest of Cabo San Lucas, Juliette attained a peak strength of 150&amp;nbsp;mph (240&amp;nbsp;km/h), the strongest tropical cyclone of the season.;

After maintaining its peak intensity for less than 12 hours, Juliette began to weaken due to an eye (cyclone)#Eyewall replacement cycles|eyewall replacement cycle. After turning to the west-northwest, the winds of the hurricane dropped to 100 mph by September 22, and the eyewall expanded to about 80&amp;nbsp;miles (130&amp;nbsp;km) in diameter. The eyewall contracted to about 40&amp;nbsp;miles (65&amp;nbsp;km), and as a result Juliette re-strengthened to attain winds of 105 mph (170&amp;nbsp;km/h). An eastward moving trough of low pressure turned the hurricane to the north-northeast into an area of cooler water temperatures and increased wind shear. Juliette quickly weakened to a tropical storm late on September 24. The eastward moving trough moved past the storm, resulting in the motion of Juliette turning to a southeast drift. The convection waned and disappeared on September 25, and on September 26 Juliette dissipated while located 450&amp;nbsp;miles (730&amp;nbsp;km) west of the southern tip of the Baja California Peninsula.;

When the motion of Juliette turned to the northeast, some computer models predicted it to continue northeastward and strike Baja California Sur. As a result, the government of Mexico issued a Tropical Storm Watch as a precautionary measure for portions of the state. When the storm weakened rapidly and turned from the coast, the watch was cancelled. Juliette remained away from land masses for its lifetime, and as a result it caused no damage or deaths.;

Accumulated Cyclone Energy (ACE) ranking
{|class=&quot;wikitable&quot; align=right
|-
!colspan=6|ACE (10;4; kt;2;) – Storm
|-
! 1
| 29.83 || Barbara
! 6
| 5.20 || Gil
|-
! 2
| 26.53 || Juliette
! 7
| 4.52 || Dalila
|-
! 3
| 10.68 || Adolph
! 8
| 3.65 || Cosme
|-
! 4
| 7.93 || Henriette
! 9
| 3.55 || Ismael
|-
!5
| 6.39 || Flossie
!10
| 1.92 || Erick
|}

The table on the right shows the Accumulated Cyclone Energy (ACE) for each storm in the season. The total ACE for the 1995 season was 100.2 x 10;4; kt;2;. The ACE is, broadly speaking, a measure of the power of the storm multiplied by the length of time it existed for, so hurricanes that lasted a long time have higher ACEs. Because several storms in the season were long-lasting or intense, the ACE of the season was near normal. The 1995 season total was the lowest since 1981, though due to a period of inactivity in the following years it has only been surpassed by four seasons.;;

Hurricane Barbara had the highest overall ACE of the season with a total of 29.83 x 10;4; kt;2;.

Source of data: Best track data from the National Hurricane Center's Tropical Cyclone Reports.[http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/1995epac.html]
;;

Storm names
The following names were used for named storms that formed in the northeast Pacific in 1995. Names that were not assigned are marked in ;gray;. The names not retired from this list were used again in the 2001 season. This is the same list used for the 1989 season. The name Dalila was used for the first time in 1995; in the 1989 season, it was Dalilia, though an error in documents prior to the season changed it. The name change has remained.;

{| width=&quot;90%&quot;
|
* Adolph
* Barbara
* Cosme
* Dalila
* Erick
* Flossie
* Gil
* Henriette
|
* Ismael
* Juliette
* ;Kiko (unused);
* ;Lorena (unused);
* ;Manuel (unused);
* ;Narda (unused);
* ;Octave (unused);
* ;Priscilla (unused);
|
* ;Raymond (unused);
* ;Sonia (unused);
* ;Tico (unused);
* ;Velma (unused);
* ;Wallis (unused);
* ;Xina (unused);
* ;York (unused);
* ;Zelda (unused);
|}

No central Pacific names were used; the first name used would have been Oliwa.

=Retirement=

The World Meteorological Organization retired one name in the spring of 1996: Ismael. It was originally replaced in the 2001 season by Israel, but for political reasons, due to its connection with Israel and the coincidence that the first name of 2001 was &quot;Adolph&quot; (later retired for similar reasons), this was changed to Ivo after the season began, but before it reached the &quot;I&quot; storm.

See also

* List of notable tropical cyclones
* 1995 Atlantic hurricane season
* 1995 Pacific typhoon season
* 1994-95 Southern Hemisphere tropical cyclone season
* 1995-96 Southern Hemisphere tropical cyclone season
* 1995-1999 North Indian Ocean cyclone seasons

External links
* [http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/1995epac.html NHC 1995 Pacific hurricane season archive]
* [http://www.prh.noaa.gov/cphc/pages/hurrclimate.php#1995 Central Pacific Hurricane Center archive]

References





Category:Pacific hurricane seasons|1995
Category:1995 Pacific hurricane season| 

es:Temporada de huracanes en el Pacífico 1995
simple:1995 Pacific hurricane season