
&quot;Hurricane Neddy&quot; is the eighth episode of ''The Simpsons'';'; eighth season which originally aired December 29, 1996.; Hurricane Barbara viciously strikes Springfield but, by pure chance, the house of Ned Flanders is the only one destroyed. As a result, he begins to lose his faith in both God and the townspeople around him. It was written by Steve Young, directed by Bob Anderson; and guest stars Jon Lovitz as Jay Sherman from ''The Critic''.;

Plot
Ned with Dr. Foster.
In midst of a quiet afternoon, the wind starts to pick up, which leads Lisa to infer that a hurricane is on the way. The evening news confirms that 'Hurricane Barbara' is close, resulting in panicked citizens storming the Kwik-E-Mart and causing Homer to attempt to secure the Simpson home (albeit very badly). The hurricane strikes and after a few treacherous hours, the storm ends and the family cautiously leaves the basement. Initially, they are thankful to see that their home is untouched and Marge comments that everything works out if one has a little faith. Meanwhile, next door Flanders emerges from a heap of rubble and sees that his house was destroyed, along with everything else he owned except the family gravestones.

Ned is relieved that his family escaped serious injury, but it turns out to be little solace since he does not have any homeowners' insurance (believing it to be a form of gambling). The Flanders family is forced to move into the Rescue Center in the church basement, although they appear to be the only family to be affected to that extent. Ned is further discouraged after learning that his business, the Leftorium, was looted following the hurricane. Distraught with annoyance, Flanders begins to believe that God is punishing him and, seeking answers, he goes to read the Bible in the church but receives a papercut. Interpreting it as further punishment, he sits down and laments about how he is falling apart, even after doing everything the Bible says.

The following day, Marge arrives at the church and takes the Flanders family back to their house, completely rebuilt by the people of Springfield. Overjoyed, Flanders inspects the house, but saddens after examining its extremely shoddy construction. The house soon collapses, causing Flanders to snap. In a bout of rage, he unleashes a torrent of insults at the residents of Springfield and directs his most vehement invective at Homer (who believes that he (Homer) got off easy). Ned then drives himself to Calmwood Mental Hospital to seek therapy. 

While in the asylum, Flanders is visited by his childhood psychiatrist, Dr. Foster, who informs Ned of his childhood existence - an out-of-control brat raised by beatnik parents who did not believe in discipline. As a result, the young Flanders went through the University of Minnesota Spankalogical Protocol, which involved eight months of continuous spanking. The treatment worked so well that it rendered Flanders unable to express any anger at all and resulted in his trademark nonsensical jabbering at moments when he was particularly close to losing his temper. This caused Ned to unknowingly repress his anger until it built up inside him and erupted in his tirade of insults directed at the townspeople.

Dr. Foster enlists Homer to help Flanders learn how to appropriately express emotions, as he is the person who Flanders harbors the most resentful feelings towards. After several failed generic remarks, Homer coaxes Flanders to admit that he hates the post office and his beatnik parents. Upon hearing this, Dr. Foster declares Flanders cured and he is immediately released.;;;;[http://www.snpp.com/episodes/4F03.html Episode Capsule] at The Simpsons Archive;;;

Production
Free John Swartzwelder.
Steve Young, a writer for the ''Late Show with David Letterman'', was brought in as a freelance writer to write this episode.;; The writers wanted to explore what made Flanders tick and examine what made him act the way he does;, and the original idea came from George Meyer, who had also wanted an episode about Flanders's faith being tested.;; One of the key story points came from his friend Jack Handey, a writer for Saturday Night Live who wanted to do a sketch about a down-on-his-luck shoemaker who is visited by a bunch of elves who help him, but make very bad shoes. Likewise, it inspired the idea that the neighbors would rebuild Flanders's house, but do a bad job and provoke an outburst.; 

A caricature of John Swartzwelder can be seen shutting the door of a room in Calmwood Mental Hospital.; Later in the episode, during the scene where the townsfolk are welcoming Ned back, someone can be seen holding a sign that says &quot;Free John Swartzwelder.&quot;; During the sequence where Flanders snaps and screams at the town, a man with a ponytail and wearing a white shirt who is a caricature of Bob Anderson can be seen.;;

Cultural references
The scene at the beginning of the episode, in which the people of Springfield mob the Kwik-E-Mart, is based on the events of the 1992 Los Angeles riots.; Todd is wearing a Butthole Surfers shirt, however the censors only allowed &quot;Buttho Surfers&quot;.; Jay Sherman from ''The Critic'', who had previously appeared in &quot;A Star Is Burns&quot;, can also be seen in the mental hospital repeatily saying &quot;It Stinks&quot;.;

Reception
Marge's line, &quot;Dear God, this is Marge Simpson. If you stop this hurricane and save our family, we will be forever grateful and recommend you to all our friends,&quot; was cited by journalist Mark Pinsky as an example of how &quot;Simpson family members are both defined and circumscribed by religion.&quot;;Victoria Combe, &quot;Praise and glory to the God-fearing Homer Simpson: Chaotic cartoon family criticized as dysfunctional is defined by religion, journalist says in book,&quot; ''Standard'', St. Catharines, Ontario: August 31, 2001, pg. A.1.FRO.;Journalist Ben Rayner speculated that some fans, whom he called &quot;nerds,&quot; would want an explanation of &quot;how Barney fit through that tiny door to the 'master bedroom' in the rebuilt Flanders family home.&quot;;Ben Rayner, &quot;Offering up the goods on Springfield's finest; The Simpsons have breached the boundaries of animation. Today a director details how they do it, writes Ben Rayner,&quot; ''Toronto Star'', October 30, 2005, pg. C.06.;

References
;
;
;

External links


*[http://www.thesimpsons.com/episode_guide/0808.htm &quot;Hurricane Neddy&quot;] at The Simpsons.com
*
*[http://www.tv.com/the-simpsons/hurricane-neddy/episode/1446/summary.html?tag=ep_list;ep_title;7 &quot;Hurricane Neddy&quot;] at TV.com
*[http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0701131/ &quot;Hurricane Neddy&quot;] at the Internet Movie Database

Category:The Simpsons episodes, season 8

es:Hurricane Neddy
no:Hurricane Neddy