
| network = Channel Nine
| first_run =
| first_aired = November 12, 2003
| last_aired = 
| num_seasons = 2
| num_episodes = 52
| list_episodes = 
| imdb_id = 0382482
| tv_com_id = 22831
}}
''The Sleepover Club'' is a series of children’s books by author Rose Impey, and a children’s television programme based on the series. Whereas the book is set in England, the television show is set in the Australian beachside suburb of Crescent Bay (a fictional place). The programme revolves around five young girls who are part of a club in which they sleepover at each others' houses at least once a week. 

Along with the everyday issues that plague preteen girls such as school projects, makeovers and boys the members of the club also have to worry about their arch-rivals the M&amp;Ms, Matthew, Michael and Marco, intent on spoiling the girls' fun.
The series is based on the books by Rose Impey. In the books the girls are 10 years old and live in Cuddington, Leicester, and the M&amp;Ms are two girls named Emma Hughes and Emily Berryman.

The television show was produced by Wark Clements Burberry Production, in association with Rialto Films, with the assistance of the Pacific Film and Television Commission for ITV Network United Kingdom, Nickelodeon United Kingdom and Nine Network Australia. It is distributed internationally by Southern Star Sales.
Two of the actors are now in Neighbours.
Cast Series One
=The Sleepover Club=
Series 1 Cast

Francesca (Frankie) Thomas

Francesca Thomas (Caitlin Stasey) is the self-appointed leader of the Sleepover Club. Although a great friend to the girls, her bossiness becomes an issue on more than one occasion. She is best friends with Kenny.

Rosie Cartwright

Rosie Cartwright (Eliza Taylor-Cotter) is a young English girl and the newest member of the Sleepover Club. She and her family (dad and her brother) moved to Australia after the death of her mother. A prank pulled on the M&amp;Ms sees her inducted into the club. 

Felicity (Fliss) Sidebotham

Felicity Sidebotham (Ashleigh Chisholm), a young fashion purist, is in love with the cutest boy in school, Ryan Scott. She is the ditsy blonde in the club who often tends to speak before thinking. In the show it is revealed that her father left the Sidebotham family three years ago.

Kendra (Kenny) Tam

Kendra Tam (Hannah Wang) is the sporty member of the club. She takes part in all sorts of physical activities from soccer to athletics and displays her affection for Manchester United FC. She shares a room with her older sister Molly, and has a fear of heights.

Lyndsey (Lyndz) Collins

Lyndsey Collins (Basia A'Hern) is the one that is the softest, especially with animals. She is best friends with Rosie. Her twin brother Michael is one of the M&amp;Ms in the TV series. In the books she has four brothers.

Frankie: leader, owner of the group, she has to make all the decisions,Best friend of Kenny

Rosie: the new member, intelligent, good writer,Good friend of Lyndz 

Fliss: girly girl, not a fashion statement, fashion victim,likes Ryan Scott

Kenny: loves sports, best friends with Frankie,
supporter of Manchester United

Lyndz: loves animals, came from England like Rosie (4 years ago), loves horses and horse riding,sister of Michael

=The M &amp; Ms=
The group that the girls consider their sworn enemies consist of leader Matthew McDougal (Ryan Corr), Marco de Pieri (Stefan La Rosa) and Michael Collins (Blake Hampson), who is also Lyndsey's twin brother. They are always trying to destroy the girl's sleepovers. Mathew is the leader.Marco is just the dumb one that doesn't really ever get whats going on and he has a crush on Fliss and has been shown as sweet occasionally and even Michael has occasional, fleeting moments of goodness, like when he defends Lydnz from Matthew and when he helps the girls in a debate. In the book the M&amp;Ms are actually 2 girls Emma Hughes and Emily Berryman.

=The Enemies=

Sara Tiara and Alana Banana

Sara Tiara (Annalise Woods) and Alana Banana (Ashleigh Brewer) are two girls who love to mock the sleepover club and their affairs. Throughout the course of the show it is discovered that Sara Tiara is in fact jealous that she was never allowed to join the club. This results in her trying everything in her power to be accepted.

The Beach Hut Cafe Owner

Mr. Stefanopolis (Mr. S)

Mr. Stefanopolis played by Vince D'Amico is the Greek owner of the Beach Hut Cafe in which the girls spend most of their time. He frequently jokes with the girls and they are kind of friends. He even hosts one of their sleepovers when his Greek niece comes to stay with him.
In the final episode, it is revealed that he is a convicted paedophile, and also is.

The Teachers

Ms. Nickels

Ms. Nickels (Emma Skelton) is the girls’ clumsy class teacher. During the show she shows interest in Rosie’s father.

Mr. Biceps

Mr. Biceps (Peter Rasmussen) is the P.E. teacher at the girls’ schools. Due to his physical fitness the girls have dubbed him Mr. Biceps.His real name is Mr Bilton

The Crush

Ryan Scott

Ryan Scott (Craig Marriott) is Fliss's longtime crush and, according to her, the cutest guy at school.

The Siblings

Callum Sidebotham

Callum Sidebotham (Trent Sullivan) is the younger brother of Fliss. He's always eating and thinks the sleepover club is silly.

Molly Tam

Molly Tam (Hannah Ling) is the mean older sister of Kenny. She wants to spoil every sleepover held at Kenny's house.

Cast Series Two
=The Sleepover Club=

Charlie Anderson

Charlie (Morgan Griffin) is the leader of the new sleepover club, and got the idea for the club from her cousin, Frankie (Caitlin Stasey). Charlie is particularly good friends with Tayla Kane and Maddy Lee. She is a writer for the school newspaper and loves to have fun.

Tayla Kane

Tayla Kane (Rachel Watson) has a brainbox of a younger sister to whom she is very close. Tayla is fashion obsessed and always likes to look good wherever she is because &quot;You are what you wear&quot;.She also likes to hear her horoscope from physic phone pal, Zodiac Zoe. She is the girly one. Her best friends are Charlie and Maddy. Although she doesn't come across as smart, it is shown in a episode that she can achieve high marks if she tries.

Maddy Lee 
 
Maddy(Emmanuelle Bains) is the sporty one of the group and likes nothing more than to ride the surf, and to hang out with her best friends. Her best friends in the Sleepover Club are Tayla and Charlie. Her full name is Madeleine. She is extremely competitive. 

Brooke Webster

Brooke (Katie Nazer-Hennings) enjoys photography and knows a lot about computers. Her best friend in the Sleepover Club is Jess. She has a stepbrother, who is one of the blockheads, he's called Simon.

Jessica Wentworth

Jess (Monique Williams) is the artist in the group. She is quite shy. She enjoys drawing and drama. Her best friend in the Sleepover Club is Brooke.

Robyn Harwood

Robyn (Lola Sanchez) is the new girl in town who is half-in-half-out with the club. She doesn't have a best friend in the Sleepover Club, but towards the end of the season, she becomes good friends with Brooke.

=The Enemies= 

Krystal Beasley

Krystal (Julia O'Connor) is a self-centred and bossy person that dreams of becoming a TV news anchorwoman. She is forever bossing around her only &quot;friend&quot; Caitlin. She appears to have everything but in fact is neglected by her parents. She always goes crying to &quot;daddy&quot; but seeing as her dad is always busy she only has Caitlin to push around.Krystal is also very rich.

Caitlin

Caitlin (Ruby Hall) is always being walked all over by bossy best friend Krystal. Caitlin is a push over, but a VERY nice one at that. She only listens to Krystal since she too doesn't have many friends. The sleepover club think that she is really nicebut she lets Krystal push her around to much they even considered letting her into their club.

=The Blockheads=

Jason Block

Jason Block is the brains of the blockheads, he is always thinking of a plan to benefit himself. Jason is and will always be the enemie of the sleep over club. Jason is played by James Bell. Jason and Charlie use to be best friends as kids because they are neighbours. It also seems like Jason likes Charlie but doent show it.

Simon Webster

Simon is the main deceiver out of the three as he always goes with her sisters mind other than Jasons. Simon is played By Nathan Coenen

Declan

Declan is basically a normal guy, with a smaller IQ and often doesn't know whats going on during Jason's schemes but he still tags along for no apparent reason. Declan is played By Shannon Lively.

Character comparison

* Charlie is the leader like Frankie was.
* Tayla is the girly one like Fliss was.
* Maddy is the sporty one like Kenny was.
* Jess is the artistic one like Lyndz was.
* Brooke is the smart one like Rosie was.
*The Blockheads are like the M&amp;Ms(Matthew, Michael, Marco)

Series One
The following is a list of episodes from series one of The Sleepover Club. The series consisted of 26 episodes, airing almost daily. The series debuted on November 12 2003 and finished its run on January 1 2004. A DVD of this series was released in January 2007.

{| class=&quot;wikitable&quot; width=100%
|-
!width=&quot;40px&quot;| # !! Title !! width=&quot;180&quot;|Original airdate


























|}

Series Two
 {| class=&quot;wikitable&quot; width=100%
|-
!width=&quot;40px&quot;| # !! Title !! width=&quot;180&quot;|Original airdate





#Episode 6 – Dance Fever-----Barry, a boy with no friends, thinks Maddie likes him but she really doesn't. Then he thinks Charlie does, but she doesn't either. Krystal and Caitlin enter the school dance contest thinking that they are sure to win because Krystal's dad is the judge and they've been having secret lessons. But Maddie and Barry have lessons of their own and save the dance.

#Episode 7 – Bird in the Hand-----The school principal's budgie isn't feeling well. So Mr. Carols visits Brooke's mom, Brooke and the girls decide that they should look after the bird. Unfortunately, they lose the bird, but get a new one just like it. But it's not convincing enough. Eventually they find it, no thanks to the blockheads.

#Episode 8 – The Haunting-----The Sleepover Club shoot a film at a haunted prison , that closed 14 years ago, for a school project. Meanwhile, the Blockheads shoot their film there too and scare the SOC. The girls think up a plan to get them back good.
 
#Episode 9 – Blast from the Past-----Tayla is failing miserably at history and if she doesn't pass she is going to st Annes at first she isn't bothered and she gives up but when she sees the school uniform she freaks and starts studying she's still no good but then she finds a weird but helpful way of learning.

#Episode 10 – Prankfest-----The Blockheads are out to prank everyone in sight during the school's weekend at camp. The SOC must team up with an unlikely ally to get revenge. They get their revenge but what will the consequences be?

#Episode 11 – Fallen Star-----Jess wins a contest based on her favorite TV show 'Beach of Hearts' and gets to hang out with the show's main actress. But Jess discovers that she's not all she seems on TV, she's horrible. But who will she choose her or the SOC?

#Episode 12 – The Crush-----Charlie has a crush on a surfer Angus Miller, played by Perth actor Daniel Murphy, but grows increasingly jealous over the time he spends with Jess.

#Episode 13 – I Spy-----Krystal dumps Caitlin as a friend, causing Jess to take pity on her and invite her to hang with the SOC. But Krystal sees this as a way she can use to her advantage and gets Caitlin to try and find out the SOC secrets. The SOC find out and luckily Caitlin and Krystal don't find out any of their secrets.

#Episode 14 – Walk Like a Boy-----The sailing contest gives $500 to the boy that wins and only $250 to the girl that wins. So Maddie decides to enter as a boy called Buddy Guy. But the Blockheads also have their eyes on the prize. Maddie has to walk, talk and act like a boy. But can she beat Jason and prove a point to why the boys and girls prizes should be the same?

#Episode 15 – The Front Page-----Charlie is thrilled to receive a trial on the school paper, but finds it impossible to get a good story. The rest of the girls secretly invent a story to help her out. But it ends up turning into an investigation and nearly making the lunch lady lose her job.

#Episode 16 – Never Too Old-----Mrs. Pendrety, a sad old woman fell by accident from the girls while chasing the Blockheads, Charlie invites her to stay with her until she feels better. But she has been annoying the girls by being her slave. But then, it gets far more exciting when the give her a makeover. 

#Episode 17 – The Deep End-----When Jason throws a sweet at Charlie during swim practice, she zooms off and wins the race. She then gets on the swim team, and it starts to get to Maddie as sport is her thing. Maddie decides to beat Charlie at the things she's good at. The whole time Krystal is plotting a plan so that she can win the swim race. Will Maddie and Charlie realise and can Maddie beat Krystal in the race?

#Episode 18 - Curtain Up-----When Charlie gets to be the director of the school play, the SOC is relieved and Tayla thinks that charlie will let her play the part of Cinderella, but when Charlie realises that Krystal had an amazing voice, she let her play the part. Who will Charlie chose? Tayla or Krystal. . In the end it is a stunning performance, but unfortunately, they can make it longer to enter a competition, but they argue, and Krystal quits...

Media and DVDs
A DVD of the entire Sleepover Club Series 1 was released in January 2007. It contains all episodes (1-26).

A DVD of the entire Second Series will be released in August 2007. It will contain all 26 episodes of the 2nd series.

Trivia

* Caitlin Stasey and Eliza Taylor-Cotter both joined the cast of Neighbours in 2005 as characters that are significantly older than the ones they played in &quot;The Sleepover Club&quot;. They also featured in the Australia's Brainiest#Australia's Brainiest Neighbour|Australia's Brainiest Neighbour.

* The show is filmed in and around the suburb of Robina, on the Gold Coast.

* The Second Series is filmed in and around Western Australia's Perth Metropolitan area at locations such as the Fremantle Jail (no longer in service, but now a major tourist attraction), the Sunset Men's home (turned Psychiatric Hospital) also no longer in use, Churchlands Senior High School and Hillarys boat harbour as well as at other various locations.

External links
*


Category:Children's ITV television programmes
Category:Australian children's television series
Category:Nine Network shows
Category:2003 television series debuts

de:Der Sleepover Club
it:The Sleepover Club
nl:The Sleepover Club
pt:The Sleepover Club
sv:Pyjamasklubben