;Burwood, Melbourne, Australia
| Origin= Los Angeles, California, U.S.
| Instrument= Bass, trumpet
| Genre = Alternative rock, funk rock
| Years_active= 1983&amp;ndash;present
| Label = Warner Bros. Records, EMI
| Associated_acts = Red Hot Chili Peppers;Fear;Jane's Addiction;What Is This?
| URL = [http://www.redhotchilipeppers.com redhotchilipeppers.com]
}}

Michael Peter Balzary (born October 16, 1962 in Melbourne, Australia), more commonly known by the stage name Flea, is an American bassist, trumpet player and session musician. He is best known as the bassist of the alternative rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers, of which he is a founding member. His work with the band incorporates several musical styles, ranging from aggressive slap bass, to more subdued and melodic techniques. Aside from the Red Hot Chili Peppers, Flea has collaborated with many artists, including Jane's Addiction and Alanis Morissette. 

Flea first learned to play bass in high school after being taught by close friend and future Red Hot Chili Peppers guitarist Hillel Slovak, who needed a bassist for his band What Is This?|Anthym. Flea eventually joined the group, but left after a few years to join the punk rock group Fear. Flea rejoined Slovak to form an intended one-off band along with fellow high school alumni Anthony Kiedis and Jack Irons. This band soon evolved into the Red Hot Chili Peppers.

Biography
= Early life=
Flea was born in Melbourne, Australia on October 16, 1962. His father, Mick Balzary, was an avid fisherman and would often take him fishing.;; When Flea was five, his family relocated to Rye, New York for his father's job.;Apter, 2004. p. 19; In 1971, his parents divorced and his father returned to Australia. Flea and his siblings stayed with their mother Patricia, who soon remarried to a jazz musician and bassist.; Flea's stepfather frequently invited musicians to his house and jam sessions would often take place. The family relocated again to Los Angeles, California, and Flea became fascinated with trumpet.;Apter, 2004. p. 20;;; He had no interest in rock music at the time and idolized jazz musicians like Miles Davis, Louis Armstrong and Dizzy Gillespie.; 

His stepfather, however, was an &quot;aggressive alcoholic&quot; who eventually became involved in shoot-outs with police. Flea recalled of the situation: &quot;I was raised in a very violent, alcoholic household. I grew up being terrified of my parents, particularly my father figures. It caused [me] a lot of trouble later in life.&quot;;Apter, 2004. p. 21; In order to cope with this situation, Flea started to experiment heavily in drugs when he was 13, especially marijuana, which he started smoking on a daily basis.;Apter, 2004. pp. 22-23;

Flea attended Fairfax High School, and was somewhat of an outcast due to his taste in music.; However, he soon met Anthony Kiedis, and after a fight, the two became best friends.;Apter, 2004. p. 34; Kiedis recalled, &quot;We were drawn to each other by the forces of mischief and love and we became virtually inseparable. We were both social outcasts. We found each other and it turned out to be the longest-lasting friendship of my life.&quot;;Apter, 2004. p. 35; Kiedis became a significant influence on Flea, turning him on to rock music, particularly punk rock.; Flea soon adopted his nickname, given to him by Kiedis while the two were on a skiing trip in reference to his jumpy and capricious nature.;

=1980-1984: Formation of the Red Hot Chili Peppers=
Flea was also close friends with Hillel Slovak, the guitarist of a local band called Anthym. When the band's original bassist, Todd Strassman, left the band, Slovak began teaching Flea to play bass.;Apter, 2004. pp. 40-45; Following several months of commitment to the instrument, Flea developed proficiency and joined the group. Shortly thereafter, Anthym entered a local &quot;Battle of the Bands&quot; contest and won second place.; During his tenure with the group, Flea began to develop a style of slap bass that would become prominent in future Red Hot Chili Peppers songs. Anthym started to play at local nightclubs, despite the fact that the members were all underage. Flea, Slovak, and Kiedis became best friends, and often partook in the recreational use of LSD, heroin, cocaine, and speed.; 

The threesome became fans of the growing punk rock movement in Los Angeles at the time. Flea went from despising the genre to listening to it exclusively: &quot;The beautiful thing about punk rock was the intensity, the energy. And punk deflated the whole bloated rock-star thing. I think that musicians who don't pay attention to punk have a gap in their knowledge that makes it difficult to communicate in this day in age.&quot;; Anthym changed their name to What Is This?, and rapidly became a local club favorite—frequently attracting more than thirty people per show. The band was faltering internally however, and Flea left the group to play bass for a well-established L.A. punk rock group called Fear.;Apter, 2004. pp. 50-56; Although Fear was a thriving act, Flea was discontent in the band and left shortly after joining.; He then successfully auditioned for the role of bassist in the British post-punk group Public Image Ltd., but rejected the offer; he later admitted that the only reason he auditioned was to jam with the band's frontman John Lydon.;

Slovak, Kiedis, and Flea began to create their own music after finding inspiration in a punk-funk fusion band called Defunkt.;Page, Scarlet (July, 2004). &quot;Red Hot Chili Peppers: The LA Punks Who Defied Death, Grunge And A Burning Crack Den&quot;. ''Mojo''.; Flea, Slovak, Kiedis and former Anthym-drummer Jack Irons formed a band called Tony Flow and the Miraculously Majestic Masters of Mayhem. The band had only one song, entitled &quot;Out in L.A.&quot;, and was formed for the purpose of playing the song once.;Apter, 2004. p. 60; Following the group's first show at The Rhythm Lounge, the owner of the bar asked them to return, but with two songs instead of one. After several more shows, and the addition of several songs to their repertoire, the band's name was changed to Red Hot Chili Peppers.;Apter, 2004. p. 61;;;

=1984-1990: First four albums=
The band's concert repertoire grew to nine songs, as a result months of playing local nightclubs and bars.;Apter, 2004. p. 62; The Red Hot Chili Peppers entered Bijou Studios to record a demo tape and subsequently secured a record deal with EMI.; Irons and Slovak however, decided to leave the Chili Peppers in order to pursue a &quot;more serious&quot; future with What Is This?.;Apter, 2004. pp. 70-74; Flea ultimately respected the decision, but felt the band would be lost without them. He and Kiedis hired drummer Cliff Martinez and guitarist Jack Sherman to fill Iron's and Slovak's places, respectively.; Andy Gill, formerly of Gang of Four, agreed to produce their first album. Gill and Sherman clashed with Flea and Kiedis; they continuously argued over music style, sound, and the album's production.;Apter, 2004. pp. 78-88; Flea himself felt that the album &quot;was a big mistake&quot;, but also admited &quot;...we [he and Kiedis] were just disrespectful and obnoxious.&quot;; The band's eponymous debut album, ''The Red Hot Chili Peppers'', was released on August 10, 1984 to largely poor critical and commercial review.;Kiedis, Sloman, 2004. pp. 234-235; After a relatively unfruitful tour, Sherman was fired in early 1985. Slovak, who had been contemplating a return to the Chili Peppers, rejoined the group after being encouraged by Flea.;;

Funk musician George Clinton was hired to produce the band's second album, ''Freaky Styley''. The strong chemistry between Clinton and the Chili Peppers was felt instantly. Flea later referred to Clinton as &quot;the warmest, kindest man in the world.&quot;;Apter, 2004. p. 110; The mood throughout production was far more positive than that of the band's previous record.;Apter, 2004. pp. 114-120; When ''Freaky Styley'' was released in August of 1985, however, it received only a bit more attention than ''The Red Hot Chili Peppers'' with roughly 75,000 copies sold by year end.; Flea was somewhat indifferent to the poor album sales as he had recently proposed to girlfriend Loesha Zeviar, who was pregnant with their child.;Apter, 2004. p. 127; 

The band hired Michael Beinhorn, their last resort among potential producers, to work on their next album;Apter, 2004. pp 130-141; What Is This? had finally disbanded, and Irons returned to the Chili Peppers in mid 1986 after Martinez was fired. Flea, Slovak and Kiedis especially were involved in heavy drug use and their relationships became strained. Flea recalled that &quot;it began to seem ugly to me and not fun; our communication was not healthy.&quot;; Kiedis became dependent on heroin, leaving Flea and Slovak to work on much of the album's material by themselves. Flea and Zeviar married, and she gave birth their daughter Clara. Kiedis was briefly kicked out of the band, and given a month to rehabilitate. Kiedis completed the rehab and rejoined the Red Hot Chili Peppers in Los Angeles to record their third album ''The Uplift Mofo Party Plan''.; Flea has referred to the album as &quot;the 'rockingest' record&quot; the band has ever made.; ''The Uplift Mofo Party Plan'' proved to be far more successful, commercially and critically, than the Chili Peppers' preceding albums; registering at #148 on the ''Billboard'' Top 100.;; Following the ''Uplift'' tour, Slovak's drug use dramatically increased. Flea's relationship with Slovak faded, and Slovak became isolated and depressed.; On June 28 1988, Slovak was found dead of a heroin overdose. Flea reflected: &quot;I didn't really know how to deal with that sadness, and I don't think [Kiedis] knew how to deal with it either.&quot;; Irons, who was taking Slovak's death particularly hard, left the group.;

Flea and Kiedis took some time to collect themselves, but decided to keep the band together. Guitarist DeWayne &quot;Blackbyrd&quot; McKnight and drummer D.H. Peligro were added, and the band entered the studio to record a new album. McKnight soon began to create tension within the group, as his style did not mesh with the rest of the band.;Kiedis, Sloman, 2004. p. 234; Peligro was a friend of John Frusciante, an eighteen year old guitarist and avid Chili Peppers fan.;;Peligro introduced Frusciante to Flea, and the three jammed together on several occasions.;Apter, 2004. pp. 178-190; Flea was impressed with Frusciante's skill, and astonished by his knowledge of the Chili Peppers' repertoire. Flea realized that Frusciante could provide the spark McKnight was lacking.;''Mother's Milk'' 2003 reissue liner notes; McKnight was fired, and Frusciante accepted an invitation to join the band.; A few weeks into the band's new lineup, Peligro was becoming unable to keep his substance abuse under control. His performance suffered severely and he was fired from the band.;Kiedis, Sloman, 2004. p. 242; The band held a widely-publicized audition, and hired Chad Smith—the last of over thirty to audition.;Kiedis, Sloman, 2004. p. 233; Flea and Zeviar started to grow apart, and he began trying to recreate the memories of his adolescence by smoking marijuana on a daily basis.; The Chili Peppers entered the studio, and completed recording of their fourth album, ''Mother's Milk'', in early 1989. Upon release, the album was met with mixed reactions from critics, but received far more commercial attention; peaking at #58 on the ''Billboard'' Hot 200.;

=1990-1998: Mainstream success and side projects=
The ensuing ''Mother's Milk'' tour put a strain on Flea's marriage. In order to make money, he needed to tour, and therefore spend time away from his family.;Apter, 2004. pp. 205-212; The band was attracting over three thousand people per show; ''Mother's Milk'' had been certified as a gold record in early 1990.;; Singles &quot;Knock Me Down&quot; and &quot;Higher Ground&quot; were breaking the top ten in charts like Modern Rock Tracks.;; By the time Flea returned to Los Angeles, however, he and Zeviar agreed to a separation.; He tried to put the separation out of his mind by smoking marijuana and having sex with willing fans.;
Flea (left) with Nirvana front man Kurt Cobain (right) in 1992 when Red Hot Chili Peppers were touring with them
When the tour was over, the Red Hot Chili Peppers severed ties with EMI and signed with Warner Bros. Records.;Kiedis, Sloman, 2004. pp. 261–262; Rick Rubin, who rejected an opportunity to produce ''Mother's Milk'', agreed to produce their next album.;Apter, 2004. pp. 220-236; Flea had largely used the principal slap bass technique on the band's preceding four albums, and decided to downplay this style in favor of more conventional, melodic bass lines.;''Funky Monks'', 1991. Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc.; To record the album, Rubin suggested a mansion that belonged to former magician Harry Houdini. Flea felt it was &quot;a creatively fertile situation&quot;, and decided to bring his daughter Clara with him.; He and the rest of the band, excluding Smith, remained inside the house for the entire recording process. When not writing or recording the album, Flea spent a large portion of his time with Frusciante smoking large quantities of marijuana.; When ''Blood Sugar Sex Magik'' was released on September 24, 1991, it received an overwhelmingly positive critical response. The album peaked at #3 on the Billboard Hot 200, and went on to sell over seven million copies in the U.S. alone.;; The album's ensuing tour was critically acclaimed—the Chili Peppers commonly performed shows with over twenty thousand in attendance.;Kiedis, Sloman, 2004. p. 282; Seattle-based grunge band Nirvana also toured with them during the West Coast leg of their United States tour.; The massive attention the Chili Peppers started receiving, however, caused Frusciante to feel extremely uncomfortable, and he abruptly quit the band during the Japanese leg ofthe album's tour.;; The band hired guitarist Arik Marshall to complete the remaining tour dates.

Marshall was fired at the end of the tour, and the band added former Jane's Addiction guitarist Dave Navarro to record an new album. Kiedis was in the middle of a heroin relapse, which forced Flea to assume the role of lyricist; something he had not yet done. He wrote most of the song &quot;Transcending&quot;, and the intro to &quot;Deep Kick&quot;. Flea also wrote the lyrics to an entire song—&quot;Pea&quot;—which he both sang and played bass on.;Kiedis, Sloman, 2004. pp. 341-344; These three songs were then released on the Chili Peppers' sixth album ''One Hot Minute''. The album was received mixed reviews and significantly less commercial success than ''Blood Sugar Sex Magik''.; The ''One Hot Minute'' tour was ultimately cut short due to various injuries Kiedis and Smith received, and the Red Hot Chili Peppers decided to go on hiatus.;Apter, 2004. pp. 290-302; Flea began to practice yoga, and slowly decreased his marijuana consumption.; Due to the Chili Peppers' inactivity, Flea and Navarro participated in a Jane's Addiction reunion tour. Rumors spread that the band was breaking up, until Navarro stated otherwise: &quot;I want to clarify that the Chili Peppers are not breaking up...Flea and I are more than happy to do both projects, time permitting.&quot;; 

Flea also had plans to record a solo album. He asked Chili Peppers manager Lindy Goetz to help him promote the record and his solo career.; Flea eventually abandoned the idea in favor of offering his bass services to other artists. He performed on over forty records from 1995 to 1998, ranging from Alanis Morissette's ''Jagged Little Pill'' to former Minutemen bassist Mike Watt's debut solo album ''Ball-Hog or Tugboat?''. He also worked with Tori Amos and Michael Stipe on a track for the soundtrack to ''Don Juan DeMarco''.;Apter, 2004. p. 281; Navarro was fired from the Chili Peppers in 1998, and Flea questioned whether or not the Red Hot Chili Peppers would stay together: &quot;the only way I could imagine carrying on is if we got John [Frusciante] back in the band.&quot;;Kiedis, Sloman, 2004. pp. 390-395; Frusciante had completed drug rehabilitation in 1997 after a severe addiction to heroin and crack cocaine left him on the brink of death.;; Flea visited Frusciante in early 1998, inviting him back to the Chili Peppers; an emotional Frusciante readily accepted.;Kiedis, Sloman, 2004. p. 408;

=1998-present: ''Californication'', ''By the Way'' and ''Stadium Arcadium''=
The band, with Frusciante back on guitar, began writing new songs during the summer of 1998 in Flea's garage.; He and Kiedis were less confident in writing the album, after the disappointing results of ''One Hot Minute''.; Flea had also recently broken up with his girlfriend of two years, Marissa Pouw, causing him to enter a state of depression,;Apter, 2004. pp. 304-311; which was only lifted when his daughter, Clara, comforted him after several weeks of crying.;

Flea was heavily influenced by electronica during the writing and recording of ''Californication'' and he attempted to emulate this when writing bass lines for the album.; ''Californication'' took less than two weeks to record; by contrast, ''One Hot Minute'' took over a year. When ''Californication'' was released on June 8, 1999 it received overwhelmingly positive critical reviews and sold fifteen million copies worldwide—more than ''Blood Sugar Sex Magik''.; The Chili Peppers played Woodstock 1999, with Flea playing completely naked—something he would do again at the Reading and Leeds Festivals the same year.; In 2001, Flea founded the Silverlake Conservatory of Music, a school dedicated to help youth progress in music.;Apter, 2004. pp. 327-338; 

Red Hot Chili Peppers spent most of 2001 writing their eighth studio album, ''By the Way''. The entire band began listening to more melodic, textured music that would reflect heavily on the album.; Frusciante became the driving force behind ''By the Way'', causing initial strife between him and Flea.; If the bassist introduced a funk rhythm into his bass lines, the guitarist would consequently disapprove.; ''By the Way'' was released on July 9, 2002 to positive critical reviews. Although not as successful as ''Californication'' or ''Blood Sugar Sex Magik'', ''By the Way'' would go on to sell over nine million copies worldwide.;;

After another two year world tour, the Chili Peppers wrote their ninth studio album ''Stadium Arcadium''. In 2005, Flea became engaged to his girlfriend Frankie Rayder, and the two bore his second daughter Sunny Bebop, later the same year.;Red Hot Chili Peppers. iTunes Originals. iTunes. September 8, 2006; Both Flea and Frusciante were more musically conjoined when writing the record. They both found inspiration in Jimi Hendrix, Jimmy Page, and Eddie Van Halen among others.;; The double album was ultimately released on May 9, 2006 to generally positive reviews, selling over seven million copies in less than two years.;;

Discography


References
* 
* 

Notes
;


External links

* [http://www.redhotchilipeppers.com Red Hot Chili Peppers official website]
*



Category:1962 births
Category:Living people
Category:Australian Americans
Category:Australian rock bass guitarists
Category:Australian male singers
Category:Australian rock singers
Category:Backing vocalists
Category:Jane's Addiction members
Category:What Is This? members
Category:Red Hot Chili Peppers members
Category:Australian film actors
Category:Fear (band) members
Category:Pigface members
Category:Grammy Award winners



cs:Michael Balzary
de:Michael Balzary
es:Flea
eu:Flea
fr:Michael Balzary
id:Flea
it:Michael Balzary
he:מייקל באלזארי
ka:მიხაელ პიტერ ბალზარი
hu:Flea
nl:Michael Balzary
ja:フリー (ミュージシャン)
no:Flea
pl:Michael Balzary
pt:Michael Peter Balzary
ru:Фли
simple:Flea (Michael Balzary)
fi:Flea
sv:Michael Balzary
tr:Flea