:''This article is about the dinosaur. For the Dutch doom metal group see Deinonychus (band).''


''Deinonychus'' () (Greek ''δεινος'', 'terrible' and ''ονυξ/ονυχος'', 'claw') was a genus of carnivorous dromaeosaurid dinosaur. There is one described species, ''Deinonychus antirrhopus''. This 3.4&amp;nbsp;metre (11&amp;nbsp;ft) long dinosaur lived during the early Cretaceous Period (Aptian - Albian stages, 121 to 98.9 million years ago). Fossils have been recovered from the U.S. states of Montana, Wyoming and Oklahoma, though teeth that may belong to ''Deinonychus'' have been found much farther east in Maryland.

“Terrible claw” refers to the unusually large, sickle-shaped talon on the second toe of each hind foot, which was probably held retracted while the dinosaur walked on the third and fourth toes. It was commonly thought that ''Deinonychus'' would kick with the sickle claw to slash at its prey but recent tests on reconstructions of similar ''Velociraptor'' talons suggest that the claw was used to stab, not slash. The species name ''antirrhopus'' means “counter balance”, which refers to John Ostrom's idea about the function of the tail. As in other dromaeosaurids, the tail vertebrae have a series of ossified tendons and super - elongated bone processes. These features seemed to make the tail into a stiff counterbalance, but a fossil of the very closely related ''Velociraptor mongoliensis (IGM'' 100/986) has an articulated tail skeleton that is curved laterally in a long S – shape. This suggests that, in life, the tail could swish to the sides with a high degree of flexibility;; In both the Cloverly and Antlers Formation, ''Deinonychus'' remains have been found closely associated with those of the ornithopod ''Tenontosaurus''. Teeth discovered associated with ''Tenontosaurus'' specimens imply it was hunted or at least scavenged upon by ''Deinonychus''.

Paleontologist John Ostrom's study of ''Deinonychus'' in the late 1960s revolutionized the way scientists thought about dinosaurs, igniting the debate on whether or not dinosaurs were warm-blooded. Before this, the popular conception of dinosaurs had been one of plodding, reptilian giants. Ostrom noted lightweight bones and raptorial claws on the feet, which revealed an active, agile predator.

Description
Size comparison of ''Deinonychus'' with a human.Based on the largest known specimens, ''Deinonychus''could reach 3.4&amp;nbsp;meters (11.1&amp;nbsp;ft), with a maximum skull length of 410&amp;nbsp;mm (16.4&amp;nbsp;in), a hip height of 0.87&amp;nbsp;meters (2.85&amp;nbsp;ft), a maximum weight of 73&amp;nbsp;kilograms (161&amp;nbsp;lb).;; Its skull was equipped with powerful jaws lined with around sixty curved, blade-like teeth. Studies of the skull have progressed a great deal over the decades. Ostrom reconstructed the partial, imperfectly preserved, skulls that he had as traingular, broad, and fairly similar to ''Allosaurus''. Additional ''Deinonychus'' skull material and closely related species found with good 3D preservation;; show that the palate was more vaulted than Ostrom thought, making the snout far narrower, while the jugals flared broadly, giving greater stereoscopic vision. ''Deinonychus skull was not just like that of Velociraptor, however, in that it had a more robust skull roof like that of ''Dromaeosaurus'', and did not have the depressed nasals of ''Velociraptor''.;Witmer, Lawrence M., Maxwell, William D. (1996). &quot; The skull of ''Deinonychus'' (Dinosauria:Theropoda): New insights and implications&quot;. ''Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology'',16(3): 73A; Both the skull and the lower jaw had fenestrae (skull openings) which reduced the weight of the skull. In ''Deinonychus'', the antorbital fenestra, a skull opening between the eye and nostril, was particularly large.;

Like all dromaeosaurs, ''Deinonychus'' possessed large manus (hands) with three claws on each forelimb. The first digit was shortest and the second one longest. Each hind foot bore a sickle-shaped claw on the second digit, which was probably used during predation; these claws were unusually large for the body size of ''Deinonychus''.

Classification
''Deinonychus'' is one of the best-known dromaeosaurids,;; and is a close relative of the smaller ''Velociraptor'', found in younger, Late Cretaceous-age rock formations in Central Asia.;;;;The clade they form is called Velociraptorinae. The subfamily name Velociraptorinae was first coined by Rinchen Barsbold in 1983;; and originally contained the single genus ''Velociraptor''. Later Phil Currie included most of the dromaeosaurids.; ([https://www.vertpaleo.org/publications/jvp/15-576-591.cfm abstract]); Two Late Cretaceous genera, ''Tsaagan'' from Mongolia; and the North American ''Saurornitholestes'',; may also be close relatives, but the latter is poorly known and hard to classify.; ''Velociraptor'' and its allies are regarded as using their claws more than their skulls as killing tools, as opposed to dromaeosaurids like ''Dromaeosaurus'' with stockier skulls.;; Together with the troodontids, the dromaeosaurids form the Deinonychosauria clade which is a sister taxon of aves. Phylogenetically, the Deinonychosauria represent the group of non-avian dinosaurs the most closely related to birds.;;

Discovery and naming
250 px|thumb|''Deinonychus antirrhopus'' skeleton
Fossilized remains of ''Deinonychus'' have been recovered from the Cloverly Formation of Montana and Wyoming;; and in the Antlers Formation of Oklahoma,; ; in North America. Additionally, teeth found in the Arundel Clay Facies (Aptian), of the Potomac Formation on the Atlantic Coastal Plain of Maryland may be assigned to the genus.;;

The first remains were uncovered in 1931 in southern Montana near the town of Bridger. The team leader, paleontologist Barnum Brown, was primarily concerned with excavating and preparing the remains of the ornithopod dinosaur ''Tenontosaurus'', but in his field report from the dig site to the American Museum of Natural History, he reported the discovery of a small carnivorous dinosaur close to a ''Tenontosaurus'' skeleton, &quot;but encased in lime difficult to prepare.&quot;;; He informally called the animal &quot;Daptosaurus&quot; and made preparations for describing it and having the skeleton put on display, but never finished this work.;;Brown brought back from the Cloverly Formation the skeleton of a smaller theropod with seemingly oversized teeth that he informally named &quot;Megadontosaurus&quot;.John Ostrom, reviewing this material decades later, realized that the teeth came from ''Deinonychus'', but the skeleton came from a completely different animal.He named this skeleton ''Microvenator''.; 

A little more than thirty years later, in August of 1964, paleontologist John Ostrom led an expedition from Yale University’s Peabody Museum which discovered more skeletal material. Expeditions during the following two summers uncovered more than 1000 bones, among which were at least three individuals. Since the association between the various recovered bones was weak, making the exact number of individual animals represented impossible to determine properly, the type specimen (YPM 5205) of ''Deinonychus'' was restricted to the complete left foot and partial right foot that definitely belonged to the same individual.; The remaining specimens were catalogued in fifty separate entries at Yale's Peabody Museum of Natural History. 

Later study by Ostrom and Grant E. Meyer analyzed their own material as well as Brown's &quot;Daptosaurus&quot; in detail and found them to be the same species. Ostrom published his findings in 1969, giving all the referred remains the new name of ''Deinonychus antirrhopus''.;; &quot;''antirrhopus''&quot; means &quot;counterbalancing&quot; and refers to the likely purpose ofa stiffened tail. 

Though a myriad of bones was available by 1969, many important ones were missing or hard to interpret. There were few postorbital skull elements, no femurs, no sacrum, no furcula or sternum, missing vertebrae, and (Ostrom thought) only a tiny fragment of a coracoid. 

Ostrom’s skeletal reconstruction of Deinonychus included a very unusual pelvic bone – a pubis which was round and flat, unlike that of other theropods, but which was the same length as the ischium and which was fossilized right next to it. 

=Further findings=
In 1974 Ostrom published another monograph on the shoulder of Deinonychus in which he realized that the pubis that he had described was actually a coracoid – a shoulder element.;Ostrom, John H.,. (1974). &quot; The Pectoral Girdle and Forelimb Function of Deinonychus (Reptilia: Saurischia) : A Correction&quot;. '' Postilla, Peabody Museum of Natural History Bulletin '', 165:1-11.;

In that same year, another specimen of Deinonychus was excavated in Montana by a Harvard University expedition headed by Farish Jenkins. This discovery added several new elements; well preserved femurs, pubes, a sacrum, and better ilia, as well as elements of the pes and metatarsus. Ostrom described this specimen and revised his skeletal restoration of Deinonychus. This time it showed the very long pubes, and Ostrom began to suspect that they may have even been a little retroverted like those of birds.;;

A skeleton of ''Deinonychus'' including bones from the original (and most complete) specimen can be seen on display at the American Museum of Natural History,;; with another specimen on display at the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard University. The American Museum and Harvard specimens are from a different locality than the Yale specimens. Even these two skeletal mounts are lacking elements including the sterna, sternal ribs, furcula, and gastralia.

Even after all of Ostrom’s work, several small blocks of lime-encased material remained unprepared in storage at the American Museum. These consisted mostly of isolated bones and bone fragments, including the original matrix, or surrounding rock in which the specimens were initially buried. An examination of these unprepared blocks by Gerald Grellet-Tinner and Peter Makovicky in 2000 revealed an interesting, overlooked feature. Several long, thin bones identified on the blocks as ossified tendons (structures which helped stiffen the tail of ''Deinonychus'') turned out to actually represent gastralia (abdominal ribs). More significantly, a large number of previously unnoticed fossilized eggshells were discovered in the rock matrix which had surrounded the original ''Deinonychus'' specimen.;;

In a subsequent, more detailed report on the eggshells, Grellet-Tinner and Makovicky concluded that the egg almost certainly belonged to ''Deinonychus'', representing the first dromaeosaurid egg to be identified.; Moreover, the external surface of one eggshell was found in close contact with the gastralia suggesting that ''Deinonychus'' might have brooded its eggs. This implies that ''Deinonychus'' used body heat transfer as a mechanism for egg incubation, and indicates an endothermy similar to modern birds.;; Further study by Gregory Erickson and colleagues finds that this individual was 13 or 14 years old at death and its growth had plateaued.Unlike other theropods in their study of specimens found associated with eggs or nests, it had finished growing at the time of its death.;;

Additional Deinonychus fossils have been found.

=Implications=
The similarity of the forelimbs of ''Deinonychus'' (left) and ''Archaeopteryx'' (right) led John Ostrom to revive the link between dinosaurs and birds.
The description in 1969 by Ostrom of ''Deinonychus'' has been described as the most important single discovery of dinosaur paleontology in the mid 20th century.;;The discovery of this clearly active, agile predator did much to change the scientific (and popular) conception of dinosaurs and opened the door to speculation that dinosaurs may have been warm-blooded. This development has been termed the Dinosaur renaissance. Several years later, Ostrom noted similarities between the forefeet of ''Deinonychus'' and that of birds, which observation led him to revive the hypothesis that birds are descended from dinosaurs.;; Thirty years later, this idea is almost universally accepted. 

''Deinonychus'' almost certainly was feathered, since its close relative ''Velociraptor'' was shown in 2007 to have been feathered, based on the presence of quill knobs on the forearm. Such knobs show where feathers anchor in modern birds. This recent discovery added weight to already strong theories that all dromaeosaurids were feathered.;;

Paleobiology and paleoecology
Feathered restoration of ''Deinonychus antirrhopus''.; Plumage based on related genera.
Geological evidence suggests that ''Deinonychus'' inhabited a floodplain or swamplike habitat.; The paleoenvironment of both the Cloverly Formation and the Antlers Formation, in which remains of ''Deinonychus'' have been found, consisted of forests, deltas and lagoons, not unlike today's Louisiana.;
Other animals ''Deinonychus'' shared its world with include herbivorous dinosaurs such as the armoured ''Sauropelta'' and the ornithopods ''Zephyrosaurus'' and ''Tenontosaurus''. In Oklahoma, the ecosystem of ''Deinonychus'' also included the large theropod ''Acrocanthosaurus'', the huge sauropod ''Sauroposeidon'', the crocodilian ''Goniopholis'', and the gar ''Lepisosteus''.;;If the teeth found in Maryland are those of ''Deinonychus'', than its neighbors would include ''Astrodon'', ''Dryptosaurus'' and a nodosaur (called ''Priconodon'') only known from teeth.

=Predatory behavior=
''Deinonychus'' teeth found in association with fossils of the ornithopod dinosaur ''Tenontosaurus'' are quite common in the Cloverly Formation.
Two quarries have been discovered that preserve fairly complete ''Deinonychus'' fossils near ''Tenontosaurus'' fossils. The first, the Yale quarry in the Cloverly of Montana, includes numerous teeth, four adult ''Deinonychus'' and one juvenile ''Deinonychus''. The association of this number of ''Deinonychus'' skeletons in a single quarry suggests that ''Deinonychus'' may have fed on that animal, and perhaps hunted it. Ostrom and Maxwell have even used this information to speculate that ''Deinonychus'' might have lived and hunted in packs.; ([http://www.vertpaleo.org/publications/jvp/15-707-712.cfm abstract]); The second such quarry is from the Antlers formation of Oklahoma. The site contains six partial skeletons of ''Tenontosaurus'' of various sizes, along with one partial skeleton and many teeth of ''Deinonychus''. One tenontosaur humerus even bears what might be ''Deinonychus'' tooth marks. Brinkman ''et al''. (1998) point out that ''Deinonychus'' had an adult mass of 70-100 kilograms, whereas adult tenontosaurs were 1-4 metric tons. A solitary ''Deinonychus'' could not kill an adult tenontosaur, suggesting that pack hunting is possible.;;

A recent study by Roach and Brinkman has called into question the cooperative pack hunting behavior of ''Deinonychus'', based on what is known of modern carnivore hunting and the taphonomy of tenontosaur sites. Modern archosaurs (birds and crocodiles) and komodo dragons display little cooperative hunting; instead, they are usually either solitary hunters, or are drawn to previously-killed carcasses, where much conflict occurs between individuals of the same species. For example, in situations where groups of komodo dragons are eating together, the largest individuals eat first and will attack smaller komodos that attempt to feed; if the smaller animal is killed, it is cannibalized. When this information is applied to the tenontosaur sites, it appears that what is found is consistent with ''Deinonychus'' having a komodo- or crocodile-like feeding strategy.''Deinonychus'' skeletal remains found at these sites are from subadults, with missing parts consistent with having been eaten by other ''Deinonychus''.;; 

Despite being the most distinctive feature of ''Deinonychus'', the shape and curvature of the sickle-claw varies between specimens. The type specimen described by Ostrom in 1969 has a strongly curved sickle claw, while a newer specimen described in 1976 had a claw with much weaker curvature, more similar in profile with the 'normal' claws on the remaining toes.;; Ostrom suggested that this difference in the size and shape of the sickle claws could be due to individual, sexual, or age-related variation.

Ostrom originally speculated that ''Deinonychus'' gripped its prey with its talons while delivering disemboweling slashes with its sickle claws.; Later studies, however, have shown that the sickle claws were not used to slash but rather to deliver small stabs to the victim.;;;; Biomechanical studies by Ken Carpenter in 2002 confirmed that the most likely function of the forelimbs in predation was grasping, as their great lengths would have permitted longer reach than for most other theropods. The rather large and elongated coracoid, hinting for powerful muscles in the forelimbs, further strengthen this interpretation.;; Carpenter's biomechanical studies using bones casts also showed that ''Deinonychus'' could not fold its arms against its body like a bird (&quot;avian folding&quot;), contrary to what was inferred from the earlier 1985 descriptions by Gauthier;; and Paul in 1988.;Paul, ''Predatory Dinosaurs'', p. 109; Studies by Senter in 2006 indicate that ''Deinonychus'' forelimbs can be used not only for grasping but also for clutching objects towards the chest.; }}};

Parsons has shown that juvenile and sub-adult specimens of ''Deinonychus'' display some morphological differences with the adults. For instance, the arms of the younger specimens were proportionally longer than those of the adults, a possible indication of difference in behavior between young and adults.;;

=Speed=
Dromaeosaurids, especially ''Deinonychus'', are often depicted as unusually fast-running animals in the popular media, and Ostrom himself speculated that ''Deinonychus'' was fleet-footed in his original description.; However, when first described, a complete leg of ''Deinonychus'' had not been found, and Ostrom's speculation about the length of the femur (upper leg bone) later proved to have been an overestimate. In a later study, Ostrom noted that the ratio of the femur to the tibia (lower leg bone) is not as important in determining speed as the relative length of the foot and lower leg. In modern, fleet-footed birds like the ostrich, the foot-tibia ratio is .95. In unusually fast-running dinosaurs like ''Struthiomimus'', the ratio is .68, but in ''Deinonychus'', the ratio is .48. Ostrom stated that the &quot;only reasonable conclusion&quot; is that ''Deinonychus'' was not particularly fast compared to other dinosaurs, and certainly not as fast as modern flightless birds.;

The low foot to lower leg ratio in ''Deinonychus'' is due partly to an unusually short metatarsus (upper foot bones). The ratio is actually larger in smaller individuals than in larger ones. Ostrom suggested that the short metatarsus may be related to the function of the sickle claw, and used the fact that it appears to get shorter as individuals aged as support for this. He interpreted all these features – the short second toe with enlarged claw, short metatarsus, etc. – as support for the use of the hind leg as an offensive weapon, where the sickle claw would strike downwards and backwards, and the leg pulled back and down at the same time, slashing and tearing at the prey. Ostrom suggested that the short metatarsus reduced overall stress on the leg bones during such an attack, and interpreted the unusual arrangement of muscle attachments in the ''Deinonychus'' leg as support for his idea that a different set of muscles were used in the predatory stroke than in walking or running. Therefore, Ostrom concluded that the legs of ''Deinonychus'' represented a balance between running adaptations needed for an agile predator, and stress-reducing features to compensate for its unique foot weapon.;

=Eggs=
The identification in 2000 of a probable ''Deinonychus'' egg associated with one of the original specimens allowed comparison with other theropod dinosaurs in terms of egg structure, nesting, and reproduction. In their 2006 examination of the specimen, Grellet-Tinner and Makovicky examined the possibility that the dromaeosaurid had been feeding on the egg, or that the egg fragments had been associated with the ''Deinonychus'' skeleton by coincidence. They dismissed the idea that the egg had been a meal for the theropod, noting that the fragments were sandwiched between the belly ribs and forelimb bones, making it impossible that they represented contents of the animal's stomach. In addition, the manner in which the egg had been crushed and fragmented indicated that it had been intact at the time of burial, and was broken by the fossilization process. The idea that the egg was randomly associated with the dinosaur were also found to be unlikely; the bones surrounding the egg had not been scattered or disarticulated, but remained fairly intact relative to their positions in life, indicating that the area around and including the egg was not disturbed during preservation. The fact that these bones were belly ribs (gastralia), which are very rarely found articulated, supported this interpretation. All the evidence, according to Grellet-Tinner and Makovicky, indicates that the egg was intact beneath the body of the ''Deinonychus'' when it was buried. It is possible that this represents brooding or nesting behavior in ''Deinonychus'' similar to that seen in the related troodontids and oviraptorids, or that the egg was in fact inside the oviduct when the animal died.;

Examination of the ''Deinonychus'' egg's microstructure confirms that it belonged to a theropod, since it shares characteristics with other known theropod eggs and shows dissimilarities with ornithischian and sauropod eggs. Compared to other maniraptoran theropods, the egg of ''Deinonychus'' is more similar to those of oviraptorids than to those of troodontids, despite studies which show the latter are more closely related to dromaeosaurids like ''Deinonychus''. While the egg was too badly crushed to accurately determine its size, Grellet-Tinner and Makovicky estimated a diameter of about 7&amp;nbsp;cm (2.7&amp;nbsp;in) based on the width of the pelvic canal through which the egg had to have passed. This size is similar to the 7.2&amp;nbsp;cm diameter of the largest ''Citipati'' (an oviraptorid) eggs; ''Citipati'' and ''Deinonychus'' also shared the same overall body size, supporting this estimate. Additionally, the thicknesses of ''Citipati'' and ''Deinonychus'' eggshells are almost identical, and since shell thickness correlates with egg volume, this further supports the idea that the eggs of these two animals were about the same size.;

References


Norell, Mark A.; &amp; Makovicky, Peter J. (1997)&quot;Important Features of the Dromaeosaur Skeleton: Information from a New Specimen”. American Museum Novitates
3215: 1-28.

External links





* [http://palaeos.com/Vertebrates/Units/340Theropoda/340.800.html#Dromaeosauridae Dromaeosauridae at Palaeos.com (technical)]
* [http://www.users.qwest.net/~jstweet1/dromaeosauridae.htm Dromaeosauridae at ''Thescelosaurus'' web site (overview of all Dromaeosaurid genera)]

Category:Cretaceous dinosaurs
Category:Dinosaurs of North America
Category:Dromaeosaurs
Category:Featured dinosaurs

ar:دينونيتشوس
cs:Deinonychus
da:Deinonychus
de:Deinonychus
es:Deinonychus
fr:Deinonychus
it:Deinonychus antirrhopus
he:דיינוניכוס
hu:Deinonychus
ms:Deinonychus
nl:Deinonychus
ja:デイノニクス
pl:Deinonych
pt:Deinonico
ru:Дейноних
simple:Deinonychus
sk:Deinonychus
fi:Deinonychus
sv:Deinonychus
vi:Deinonychus
zh:恐爪龙