In J. R. R. Tolkien's fantasy writings, Orcs or Orks are a race of creatures who are used as soldiers and henchmen by both the greater and lesser villains of ''The Silmarillion'' and ''The Lord of the Rings'' &amp;mdash; Morgoth, Sauron and Saruman. The Orcs also work independently as the common antagonists in ''The Hobbit'', though in that work they are called Goblins.

Although not dim-witted and even crafty, they are portrayed as miserable beings, hating everyone including themselves and their masters, whom they serve out of fear. They make no beautiful things, but rather design cunning devices made to hurt and destroy. 


Tolkien's influences


&quot;Orc&quot; or &quot;Ork&quot; is an Old English word which appears in the epic ''Beowulf'' and refers to the undead monsters of Grendel's race (''orc-néas'' &quot;orc-corpses&quot; ). Tolkien translated ''orc'' as &quot;demon&quot;;; or &quot;evil spirit or bogey&quot;;;; he claimed he used the word because of its &quot;phonetic suitability&quot; - its similarity to various equivalent terms in his languages of Middle-earth|Middle-earth languages.;

In his later, post-''The Lord of the Rings'' writings (including ''The Adventures of Tom Bombadil'' and many essays published in ''The Peoples of Middle-earth)'', Tolkien preferred the spelling &quot;Ork&quot;, evidently mainly to avoid the form ''Orcish'', which would be naturally pronounced with the c as /s/ instead of /k/ in English. Tolkien indeed used the adjective ''Orkish''. 

About the goblins of ''The Hobbit'', Tolkien wrote:

;They are not based on direct experience of mine; but owe, I suppose, a good deal to the goblin tradition ... especially as it appears in George MacDonald, except for the soft feet which I never believed in.;;

Middle-earth terms for Orcs
In the High-elven tongue Quenya, the word for &quot;Orc&quot; was ''urko'', plural ''urqui'', meaning &quot;bogey&quot;, or &quot;bogeyman&quot;, that is, something that provokes fear. In the Grey-elven tongue Sindarin, it was ''orch'', plural ''yrch''. In the Dwarf (Middle-earth)|Dwarven tongue Khuzdul, it was ''rukhs'', plural ''rakhâs''.In the language of the Drúedain or Wild Men, it was ''gorgûn''. In the Black Speech of Mordor, the equivalent was ''Uruk'', as can be seen in ''Uruk-hai'', &quot;Orc-folk&quot;. ''Orc'' itself is strictly from Rohirric;&quot;Orc is the form of the name that other races had for this foul people as it was in the language of Rohan.&quot;; and the Hobbit-language,;[http://tolkien.slimy.com/faq/Creatures.html#OrcGoblin What was the relationship between Orcs and Goblins?] from the [http://tolkien.slimy.com/ The Tolkien Meta-FAQ] by Steuard Jensen. Brackets by eds.; which shared linguistic roots.

''Uruk'' and ''Uruk-hai'' were reserved for the Uruks themselves, a special breed or breeds of Orc; they called smaller, weaker Orcs ''snaga'', &quot;slave&quot;. The Grey Elves also referred to the Orcs as a whole as the ''Glamhoth'', &quot;noisy horde&quot;.;; The word &quot;goblin&quot; is used to represent the original Hobbit ''Orc''. In ''The History of Middle-earth'' Tolkien writes about an Orc captain named ''Boldog'';; but later specifies that ''Boldog'' may have been either a term or a title for Orc (Middle-earth)#Fallen Maiar|another special kind of Orc instead of a personal name.;; 
 
=Orcs, Goblins, and Uruks=
;
In ''The Hobbit'', Tolkien used the word ''goblins'' for Orcs, because he had not yet identified the world of ''The Hobbit'' with Middle-earth (which predated ''The Hobbit'' by several decades, in early writings which would later become ''The Silmarillion''). Fortunately Tolkien did include some references to his legendarium in ''The Hobbit'', which later allowed him to identify its lands with his Middle-earth. The term ''Orc'' does occur, but only in an instance where Gandalf is trying to scare Bilbo by mentioning creatures of the wilderness (&quot;goblins, hobgoblins, and orcs of the worst description&quot;) and in the name of Thorin's sword, ''List of Middle-earth weapons|Orcrist'' (&quot;goblin-cleaver&quot;).

In ''The Lord of the Rings'', ''Orc'' is used predominantly, and ''goblin'' mostly in the Hobbits' speech. The second volume of the novel, ''The Two Towers'', contains passages where the terms are used to describe Saruman's Uruk-hai: 
;There were four goblin-soldiers of greater stature, swart, slant-eyed, with thick legs and large hands. They were armed with short broad-bladed swords, not with the curved scimitars usual with Orcs: and they had bows of yew, in length and shape like the bows of Men.;;;

Later, Tolkien writes:
;Upon a stake in the middle was set a great goblin head; upon its shattered helm the white badge could still be seen.;;;

The &quot;white badge&quot; mentioned in the latter passage makes it clear that the beheaded goblin was one of the Uruk-hai. Tolkien writes that these bore a white Elf-rune (similar in appearance to the mathematical symbol ;''Orc'' [story-internally] is not an English word.;English was not spoken, or rather had not yet developed, in Middle-earth; it is a fictional version of the prehistoric Earth. ; It occurs in one or two places but is usually translated ''goblin'' (or ''hobgoblin'' for the larger kinds). ''Orc'' is the hobbits' form of the name given at that time to these creatures, and it is not connected at all with [English] ''orc'', ''ork'', applied to sea-animals of dolphin-kind.;;

Thus, ''goblin'' represents a term for Orcs used by Hobbits (which happens to be ''Orc''). Since ''Orc'' is also used by Men (especially Rohirrim) and Elves, it may also be present in Westron, the &quot;Common Speech&quot; in the West of Middle-earth. 

The original edition of ''The Hobbit'' and early drafts of ''The Lord of the Rings'' first used ''goblin'' everywhere and used ''hobgoblin'' for larger, more evil goblins: when ''goblin'' and ''goblins'' were replaced with ''Orc'' and ''Orcs'', Tolkien used the terms Uruk-hai|''Uruk'' and ''Uruk-hai'' for his stronger Orcs.

The physical appearance of Orcs

Orcs are described as ugly and filthy fanged humanoids. The largest can reach human size, but they are usually significantly shorter. Many have long arms, like monkeys or apes. Along with that, many of them have crooked backs and legs. They have sour black blood, reminiscent of reanimated corpses. 

Tolkien describes Orcs explicitly in one of his ''Letters'':

;...they are (or were) squat, broad, flat-nosed, sallow-skinned, with wide mouths and slant eyes; in fact degraded and repulsive versions of the (to Europeans) least lovely Mongol-types.;;;

In response to charges that the above comment is racist, Tolkienist Steuard Jensen writes in his ''Tolkien Newsgroups FAQ'':

;At first glance this looks blatantly racist, but the qualifier &quot;to Europeans&quot; casts it in a very different light: Tolkien explicitly recognized that different cultures have different standards of beauty, and that his impressions did not reflect any underlying superiority. Moreover, he made it clear that the Orcs were not in any sense actual &quot;Mongol-types&quot;, but &quot;degraded and repulsive versions&quot; of humanoid stock. (Nevertheless, his comment certainly falls short of modern standards of sensitivity.);[http://tolkien.slimy.com/faq/External.html#Racist Was Tolkien racist? Were his works?] from [http://tolkien.slimy.com/ Tolkien Meta-FAQ] by Steuard Jensen. Bolding by editors;;

Fellow Tolkienist Michael Martinez argues in ''Parma Endorion'', his free E-book guide to Middle-earth, that Tolkien 

;...needed a human model which, when distorted beyond realistic appearance, might appear monstrous and corrupted. In fact, many Asian cultures represent demons and evil gods in a similar fashion. I feel Tolkien's choice was inspired by a broad understanding of mythology, and not by racism.;[http://www.xenite.org/books/parma_endorion.html Martinez, Michael (1998). ''Parma Endorion: Essays on Middle-earth, 3rd edition''] [http://www.ebookbroadcast.com/ebooks/parma_endorion.pdf Download link];;

Martinez also opines that Tolkien may have based the Orcs on the Huns, in the sense of their &quot;historical context&quot; within Middle-earth as enemy hordes and pillagers.; This should not be surprising since he based his writings on a Western viewpoint and the Mongol Empire did reach Europe. 

Even so, some white supremacists interpret ''The Lord of the Rings'' as portraying white western Europeans as &quot;good&quot; and ugly dark-skinned non-whites as &quot;bad&quot;. Jensen continues in his ''FAQ'':

;Finally, a few people have mistaken the symbolic conflict between &quot;darkness&quot; and &quot;light&quot; in the books for a conflict between &quot;black&quot; and &quot;white&quot;, which they then interpret racially (which is already a stretch). They seem to overlook the ghastly white corpse-light of Minas Morgul, the White Hand of Saruman, and Isildur's black Stone of Erech (Middle-earth)|Erech, to name a few exceptions.;

;As for specific claims that Tolkien linked skin color to good and evil, there are simply too many exceptions for that to hold up. Light skinned characters who did evil things include Saruman, Grima, Gollum, Boromir, Denethor, and the Númenor|Númenóreans as mentioned above. And it is notable that Tolkien described Forlong's people of Gondor [reinforcements who come to Minas Tirith in ''The Return of the King''] and even the men of Bree as &quot;swarthy&quot;, the same term he used for example of the Southrons who were ambushed by Faramir (though to be fair, he may have imagined different degrees of &quot;swarthiness&quot; for those groups). For that matter, Sam's flash of empathy for the fallen Southron he saw during the ambush [in Ithilien in ''The Two Towers''] indicates that many of Sauron's soldiers were likely unwilling slaves, not evil at heart.;

;In short, while there are racially &quot;suspicious&quot; elements to be found in Tolkien's writings if one hunts for them, closer examination typically reveals the attitude behind them to be benign. That doesn't mean that he was perfect, but it certainly doesn't seem that he should be condemned for intolerance.;;

As Tolkien himself said of racism:
;I should regret giving any colour to the notion that I subscribed to the wholly pernicious and unscientific race-doctrine.;;;

Types of Orcs
There was much variation among Orcs. The most obvious examples are the ''Uruk-hai'', who were larger, more powerful and had black skin.Smaller and weaker Orcs than the Uruk-hai were called ''snaga'' (&quot;slave&quot;) by the latter.There was also some variation in terms of function. Sauron apparently bred specialized types, such as the &quot;super-soldier&quot; Uruk-hai, and smaller, tracker Orcs or 'Snufflers' (one of which appears in ''The Return of the King'', paired with an Uruk of Mordor, searching for the hobbits). The Uruk-hai of Saruman were also physically different from the Uruk-hai of Sauron; they were taller and had more human-like proportions while the latter were shorter and had longer arms (as shown by Uglúk and Grishnákh in ''The Two Towers''). In ''The History of Middle-earth'' Tolkien mentions Maia (Middle-earth)|Maiar incarnate in Orc-bodies called ''Boldogs'' (see below).

Saruman apparently bred his own modified orcs.Tolkien wrote of Saruman creating ''Men-orcs'' and ''Orc-men'' in &quot;Myths Revisited&quot; in ''Morgoth's Ring''.There has been speculation that these Uruk-hai were cross-bred with Men of Dunland, and these could withstand the sunlight.However, this has never been stated directly.The Orc-men, also called ''Half-orcs'' and ''goblin-men'', were definitely crossbreeds. 

In terms of &quot;political factions&quot;, the Orcs served Morgoth in Angband (Middle-earth)|Angband and subsequently Sauron in Mordor. By the time of the War of the Ring, some served Saruman in Isengard. However, as Sauron laid low after losing the Ring at the end of the Second Age (before returning to Mordor), some Orcs must have worked independently. Before and during the time when ''The Hobbit'' takes place, some Orcs had Mount Gundabad as their capital, the Orcs of the Misty Mountains were apparently ruled by one &quot;Great Goblin&quot;, the former Dwarf-realm of Moria (Middle-earth)|Moria was held by Orcs under one List of Middle-earth Orcs#Azog|Azog and then his son Bolg, and one Golfimbul had led the Orcs of Mount Gram (Middle-earth)|Mount Gram in a foray into the Shire.

Orkish culture
Tolkien does not elaborate much on Orc culture and customs. However, we do know that Orcs know some form of healing arts (as the Orc-band apply harsh Orkish medicine to Merry's injuries while in their captivity). We also know that their armour, though inferior to that of Elves and Dwarves, is serviceable enough. Also, they often use poisoned blades (as Aragorn states as he inspects a wound of Sam; the wound is fortunately not poisoned) and arrows (as they use such on Isildur). Also, they like to sing horrible songs (as in ''The Hobbit'').
;
=Orkish diet=

In ''The Hobbit'', Tolkien indicates that Orcs are &quot;always hungry&quot;, although given the demeanour of that book, it is not clear if this is an exaggeration or not.Orcs do eat all manner of flesh, including those of men and horses, except perhaps their own, although the implications of cannibalism among Orcs is alluded to quite frequently. In Chapter II of ''The Two Towers'', Grishnákh, leader of the Mordor Uruks, accuses the Uruks of Saruman (who look different from them) of eating Orc-flesh, which the latter angrily deny. Later List of Middle-earth Orcs#Shagrat|Shagrat of Cirith Ungol threatens to &quot;eat&quot; a disobedient ''List of Middle-earth Orcs#Snaga|snaga'' (slave), although this could be simply an emotional or symbolic threat (prior to this, however, Shagrat indicates that Gorbag could be &quot;for the pot&quot; after suggesting that the envenomated Frodo should &quot;go in the pot&quot;, itself indicating a stew or broth that the Orcs eat).In the film version of ''The Two Towers'', the Uruk Uglúk beheads a rebellious orc, then says, &quot;Looks like meat's back on the menu, boys!&quot;Immediately, the other Uruks and orcs fall upon the dead corpse, and entrails are seen flying through the air.

Orkish language
The Orcs had no language of their own; merely a piecemeal of corrupted versions of words derived from various languages. However, individual tribes developed dialects that were so widely different from each other that the Orkish tongue was of no use for communication between tribes; for this purpose, Westron was used, albeit with a crude accent.The few words in common usage throughout Orc tribes extant in the text of ''The Lord of the Rings'' are from Black Speech; some examples are ''ghâsh'', &quot;fire&quot;, ''sharkǔ'', &quot;old man&quot; (referring to Saruman's nickname of &quot;Sharkey&quot; during The Scouring of the Shire), ''snaga'', &quot;slave&quot;, and ''Uruk''. Another &quot;Orkish&quot; word is ''tark'', &quot;man of Gondor&quot;, from Westron and ultimately Quenya ''tarkil'', &quot;high man&quot;.

When Sauron returned to power in Mordor in the Third Age, Black Speech was used by the captains of his armies and by his servants in Barad-dûr.

A substantial sample of debased Black Speech/Orkish can be found in ''The Two Towers'', where the Mordor Uruk Grishnákh curses the Isengard Uruk Uglúk:

:''Uglúk u bagronk sha pushdug Saruman-glob búbhosh skai!''

In ''The Peoples of Middle-earth'',Tolkien gives the translation: &quot;Uglúk to the cesspool, sha! the dungfilth; the great Saruman-fool, skai!&quot;. However, in a note published in the Tolkien scholarly linguistic journal ''Vinyar Tengwar'' this alternative translation is given: &quot;Uglúk to the dung-pit with stinking Saruman-filth, pig-guts, gah!&quot;

Historical notes
On the subject of Orkish tendencies to good and evil, ''The Silmarillion'' states of the Last Alliance at the Battle of Dagorlad and the subsequent siege of Barad-dûr that &quot;All living things were divided in that day, and some of every kind, even of beasts and birds, were found in either host, save the Elves only. They alone were undivided and followed Gil-galad. Of the Dwarves, few fought upon either side; but the kindred of Durin of Moria fought against Sauron.&quot; (&quot;Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age&quot;) Since the Elves alone were said to be undivided, this apparently implies that at least some Orcs fought ''against'' Sauron, though this may be an overliteral interpretation of the passage. Orcs are known to fight amongst themselves frequently, if not actually against Sauron.On the subject of orc redeemability Tolkien wrote in one of his letters &quot;I nearly wrote 'irredeemably bad'; but that would be going too far. Because by accepting or tolerating their making - necessary to their actual existence - even Orcs would become part of the World, which is God's and ultimately good. That God would 'tolerate' that, seems no worse theology than the toleration of the calculated dehumanizing of Men by tyrants that goes on today.&quot;

To some extent Tolkien did not regard Orcs as inherently evil, or evil in their own right, but rather as tools and slaves of Morgoth and Sauron, hating themselves and their masters as they hated everyone else. He wrote once that &quot;we were all orcs in The Great War&quot;.

The origin of Orcs
The origin of Orcs is an open question. In Tolkien's writings, evil is not capable of independent creation, making it unlikely that the Vala (Middle-earth)|Vala Morgoth, who was obviously the first to produce them, could do that ''ex nihilo''.

Unlike the ''orc-néas'' ('orc-corpses') of Beowulf, no female Orcs are ever mentioned by Tolkien in any publication. However, in the published ''Silmarillion'' it is stated that Orcs &quot;breed after the manner of Elves and Men&quot;, implying that there are; in ''The Hobbit'' the Orc Bolg is the son of one Azog, while Gollum is described as having eaten a young Orc child (&quot;goblin-imp&quot;) shortly before he first met Bilbo. Tolkien confirms in a letter that female Orcs did exist;Unpublished letter dated 21 October 1963 to Mrs Munby;.

=Made from the earth=

According to the oldest &quot;theory&quot; proposed by Tolkien (found in ''The Fall of Gondolin'', from ''The Book of Lost Tales'', circa 1917 — the first tale of Middle-earth to be written in full), Orcs were made of stone and slime through the sorcery of Morgoth (''&quot;bred from the heats and slimes of the earth&quot;'' — ''The Book of Lost Tales, Vol. 2'').

=Corrupted Elves=
Tolkien later changed the legendarium so that Morgoth could no longer produce life on his own, and amended the origins to the &quot;theory&quot; that would eventually be published in ''The Silmarillion'': that the Orcs were transformed from Elf (Middle-earth)|Elves &amp;mdash; the purest form of life on Arda (the Earth) &amp;mdash; by means of torture and mutilation; and this &quot;theory&quot; would then become the most popular. Moreover, if Orcs were in fact Elves at their core, this could perhaps mean that they were also immortal &amp;mdash; a fact which, if true, would seem inconsistent with J. R. R Tolkien's treatment of Orcs, although the books do not openly confirm or deny it. If Orcs indeed were immortal, it holds no doubt that their Fëa and hröa|''fëar'' would not be allowed reincarnation by Mandos, if they even answered the calling. Most Orcs would probably fear the calling of Mandos, and therefore would see their ''fëar'' diminished to evil spirits. These may have been some of the evil spirits occasionally described in the books, such as the spirit which tempted Gorlim of Barahir's company, or the Barrow-wights. There is some evidence for the immortality, or otherwise long life of Orcs in ''The Two Towers'': Gorbag#Gorbag|Gorbag and Orc (Middle-earth)#Shagrat|Shagrat, during the conversation which Sam overheard, mention the &quot;Great Siege&quot; of the Last Alliance. It is possible to interpret from the sentence that they were actually there and remembered it themselves: an event which lay millennia in the past.Another interpretation of this conversation is that this &quot;Great Siege&quot; could have instead been merely the current siege ongoing at Minas Tirith, or the siege of Minas Morgul.They certainly did live for at the very least hundreds of years, since Bolg was the son of Azog and his death occurred over 140 years after the death of his father.This second theory is consistent with a statement made in the &quot;Myths Transformed&quot; essay of ''Morgoth's Ring'' that the orcs had short lifespans in relation to the Númenóreans. The published ''Silmarillion'' states also that the Orcs reproduce after the manner of the Children of Ilúvatar (i.e. Men and Elves).In the ''Hobbit,'' Gollum remembers killing and eating a &quot;small goblin-imp,&quot; which probably refers to a baby or child goblin.

Since this version of the origin of Orcs explicitly appears in the published ''Silmarillion'', many have accepted it at face value as Tolkien's final views on the matter. However, as can be seen, Tolkien wrote later differing accounts, which may reflect his final intentions (see Middle-earth canon).
This manner of the Orc's creation is referred to in Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring by Saruman after creating the Uruk-hai. Note that the films are not canon, though.

=Fallen Maiar=
There are hints in the ''The History of Middle-earth|History of Middle-earth'' series of books, (especially in ''Morgoth's Ring'' in the section &quot;Myths Transformed&quot;), that some Orc leaders, such as the First Age's Boldog, or the Great Goblin encountered by Bilbo and the Dwarf (Middle-earth)|Dwarves, may in fact have been fallen Maia (Middle-earth)|Maiar which had taken Orc form:

: ''Some of these things may have been delusions and phantoms but some were no doubt shapes taken by the servants of Melkor, mocking and degrading the very forms of the children. For Melkor had in his service great numbers of Maiar, who had the power, as their Master, of taking visible and tangible shape in Arda.''(''Morgoth's Ring'', &quot;Myths transformed&quot;, text X)

: ''Boldog (…) is a name that occurs many times in the tales of the War. But it is possible that Boldog was not a personal name, and either a title, or else the name of a kind of creature: the Orc-formed Maiar, only less formidable than the Balrogs'' (Author's footnote to the text X)

: ''Melkor had corrupted many spirits - some great as Sauron, or less as Balrogs. The least could have been primitive Orcs.'' (Author's note to text)

=Some cross-bred with Men=
Tolkien also &quot;suggested&quot; that Man (Middle-earth)|Men were cross-bred with Orcs under Morgoth's lieutenant, Sauron (and possibly under Morgoth himself). The fierce Orcs known as Uruk-hai were created in this way. The process was later repeated during the War of the Ring by Saruman, enabling him to make his own Uruks.

:''There is no doubt that long afterwards, in the Third Age, Saruman rediscovered this, or learned of it in lore, and in his lust for mastery committed this, his wickedest deed: the interbreeding of Orcs and Men, producing both Men-orcs large and cunning, and Orc-men treacherous and vile.'' (''Morgoth's Ring'', &quot;Myths Transformed&quot; - Text X)

While Tolkien at some point saw all Orcs as descended from tortured Elves, later comments of his indicate, according to Christopher Tolkien in ''Morgoth's Ring'' (&quot;Myths Transformed, text X&quot;), that he began to feel uncomfortable with this theory. At about the same time he removed the references to the Thrall-Ñoldorin, he also began searching for a new origin for the Orcs. The question of Orc origin may have been one of the problems Tolkien tried to solve by completely changing the cosmology and prehistory of Arda. By setting the origin of Men back to almost the same time as the Elves, he possibly allowed for Men to be the origin of Orcs all along. Tolkien died before he could complete this upheaval of the cosmology, however, so the Elf origin was adopted in the published version of ''The Silmarillion''.

=Sentient beasts= 
Yet other of Tolkien's theories proposes that Orcs may have begun as animals of vaguely humanoid shapes, empowered by the will of the Dark Lord (first Morgoth, later Sauron):

: ''The Orcs were beasts of humanized shape (…).'' ('Morgoth's Ring', &quot;Myths transformed&quot;, text VIII') 

It is certain all Orcs were dependent on the Dark Lord in various ways: after their leader was defeated, the Orcs were confused and dismayed, and easily scattered by their enemies. In the millennia after Morgoth's defeat and banishment from Arda, they were without a leader, and degenerated to small, quarrelsome tribes hiding in the Misty Mountains. Only when Sauron returned to power did they begin to reclaim some of their old power. The same happened after Sauron's defeat by the Last Alliance of Elves and Men: only when Sauron returned as the Necromancer of Mirkwood did the Orcs become a real danger for Middle-earth again.

Individual Orcs

 ''for Orcs unique to the New Line films''

Influence on later fantasy

Tolkien's Orcs have indisputably been a major influence on fantasy fiction and games; they are the literary precursors of the Orcs (and similar races) of many different settings like ''Warhammer Fantasy'', ''Forgotten Realms'' and ''Warcraft''. The Orcs of the above-mentioned games most often differ from Tolkien's Orcs in that they are taller and larger than humans and usually have green or greyish-green skin (in the case of the ''Warcraft'' Orcs, they even become the protagonists in the third game, redeeming themselves from the pact they made with the Burning Legion).

C. S. Lewis may have inserted a nod to his friend's Orcs in ''The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe''. When Aslan goes to his death on the Stone Table, the narrator mentions various evil creatures gathered around the White Witch — including &quot;Orknies&quot; (the name is also directly based on the above Old English term).

Adaptations

;
;
Image:Bakshi_Orcs.jpg|Orcs from the 1978 animated version of ''The Lord of the Rings''.
Image:Ugluk_1.jpg|Uglúk the Uruk; in Peter Jackson's ''The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (film)|The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers''.
Image:Sharku_2.jpg|Sharku, an original Orc in Jackson's ''The Two Towers''.
Image:STAGE_ORC.jpg|An Orc from the Cincinnati (2003) production of ''The Return of the King''.
;
;

Orcs have been featured in many adaptations of Tolkien's Middle-earth writings, from film to stage to video games.
Orc cannibalism in Jackson's ''The Two Towers''.
Some adaptations have made Goblins distinct from Orcs, contrary to what Tolkien intended. This was implied in New Line Cinema's The Lord of the Rings film trilogy directed by Peter Jackson, and can be seen in the real-time strategy games ''The Lord of the Rings: War of the Ring'' and ''The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II''. In the former, Goblins can be used alongside common Orcs and Uruk-hai, while in the latter Goblins get their own playable faction.

Rather than simply being hinted as in the book, however, Orkish cannibalism is displayed outright in the New Line films, when Uglúk, leader of the Isengard Uruk-Hai (after List of original characters in the Lord of the Rings film trilogy#Lurtz|Lurtz's death) kills a disobedient Orc (who wanted to eat Pippin and Merry against the order of Saruman) and announces: &quot;Looks like meat's back on the menu, boys!&quot;.

In ''The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II - The Rise of the Witch-king|The Rise of the Witch-king'', an expansion pack for ''The Battle for Middle-earth II'', the Angmar faction uses &quot;Gundabad Orcs&quot; as ordinary foot soldiers, referring to their capital of Mount Gundabad. Like the Goblins of the Misty Mountains, they sometimes ride wolves in battle.

Notes and references
;
;
;

External links
* A more detailed and 'technical' approach to a problem of the origin of the Orcs can be found under the following link:

:[http://docs.google.com/View?docid=ddwd98qd_0hrnqqr Origin of the Orcs]

:The essay puts emphasis to different theories of the origin of the Orcs and their validity in the light of Tolkien's writings.

fr:Orque (Terre du Milieu)
hr:Orci (Tolkien)
it:Orchi (Tolkien)
la:Orces
ja:オーク (トールキン)
no:Ork
pl:Ork
ru:Орки Средиземья

Category:Middle-earth Orcs
Category:Fictional cannibals