Muso Gonnosuke Katsuyoshi (from the Buko Hyakunin Isshu).

Musō Gonnosuke Katsuyoshi(夢想權之助勝吉) was a samurai of the early 1600s and the traditional founder of the Koryu school of jojutsu known as Shinto Muso-ryu|Shintō Musō-ryū (神道夢想流/神道無想流). He is perhaps most famous for his duels with the legendary swordsman Miyamoto Musashi.

Traditional origin
Muso Gonnosuke Katsuyoshi was born into a samurai family, and like many other famous samurai and martial art founders, claimed to trace their lineage to a family of the classical period of samurai. His family is supposedly descendant from ''Kiso Kanja No Taiyu Kakumei '';[http://www.furyu.com/archives/issue2/Muso.html] ''&quot;Muso Gonnosuke and the Shinto Muso-ryu Jo by Wayne Muromoto&quot;'';, a retainer of the famous samurai general Minamoto Yoshinaka. Gonnosukes original family name is said to have been Hirano and that he used his given name of Gonbei in his early days. Unlike his future counterpart, Miyamoto Musashi, Gonnosuke was not a ronin (masterless samurai) through a defeat in battle such as is claimed with Musashi in the battle of Segikahara, but had gone out on the road on a warrior pilgrimage to improve his skills in duels and by learning from different martial arts schools on the road. This was a common tradition called ''musha shugyo'' and many samurai wishing to develop their martial abilities undertook such travels frequently. Musashi had probably been a part of the losing side in the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600 and had since been a ronin and undertaking his own ''musha shugyo''.

Early life on the road
The Shinto Muso-ryu densho lists several of Muso Gonnosuke's teachers in martial arts; one of whom, according to the Makabei family records, was Sakurai Osumi-no-Kami, a lieutenant of Makabei Hisamoto (nicknamed Oni Doumu), who was a student of the founder of Kasumi Shinto-ryu Kenjutsu. Gonnosuke received his other weapon training in the Tenshin Shoden Katori Shinto-ryu|Tenshin Shōden Katori Shintō-ryū;;, founded by Iizasa Choisai Ienao, and also that he received training in either Kashima Shinto-ryu or Kashima Shinden Jikishinkage-ryu depending on sources. In addition to learning the ken (sword), he learned to use the bo (long staff), naginata (pole weapon), yari (spear) and various other weapons. Gonnosuke would eventually receive the rank of ''menkyo'', a complete license with the authority to train and develop the art, from Katori Shintō-ryū.

Sometime after he finished his training in Katori Shinto-ryu, Gonnosake went out on the road, travelling through Japan with a few followers as a wandering swordsman, always looking for an opponent to fight duels with and at the same time teaching swordsmanship to a selected few. It is claimed that he never lost a duel, defeating Japan's finest warriors and remained undefeated until he encountered the ronin Miyamoto Musashi.

His first duel with Miyamoto Musashi
The first of the two legendary duels between Musashi and Gonnosuke was supposed to have taken place between 1596-1614. Scholars argue as to when and where the actual duel took place, and indeed some argue if it even took place to begin with. The essence of the story, however, tells of how Gonnosuke, by now a very famous swordsman and arrogant in his (considerable) martial abilities, had one day encountered Musashi and had unceremoniously challenged him to a duel. Musashi accepted and Gonnosuke, brandishing his sword, immediately threw himself at Musashi who with ease avoided Gonnosuke's strike and proceeded to lock Gonnosuke's sword, using both his long and short sword, in an X-shaped block (''jujidome''). 

The ''Annals of the Niten'' (''Niten ki''), the traditional source of information for Miyamoto Musashi, tells this version of the first duel. ;Matsui, Kenji. 1993. ''The History of Shindo Muso Ryu Jojutsu'', translated by Hunter Armstrong (Kamuela, 
HI: International Hoplological Society); 

:''&quot;While Musashi was in Edo, a man named Musō Gonnosuke came, looking for a match. Gonnosuke was armed with a ''bokutō'' (wooden sword). At the moment, Musashi had a willow bow, but he immediately took up a stick to confront Gonnosuke. Without even a nod, Gonnosuke attacked. Musashi struck him down in one stroke. Thwarted, Gonnosuke quit.&quot;''

Again, the details of exactly what happened in the duel is debated and still unclear. In the version found in the ''Kaijo monogatari'', Gonnosuke and Musashi meets in Akashi instead of Edo, and the former is also brandishing a long four ''shaku'' staff instead of a wooden sword. It states that Gonnosuke had previously encountered Musashi's father, Shinmen Munisai, who was an expert of the jitte and had defeated him. Gonnosuke, in a condescending tone of voice, asked Musashi if he was as skilled as his father and if he used similar techniques. Musashi supposedly said: &quot;If you have seen my father's technique you have seen mine&quot;, after which Gonnosuke attacked Musashi and was defeated.

The weapons used are also in debate. As mentioned above, some claim Gonnosuke was using a long staff (''bo'') reinforced with metal rings. Other versions claim he used an exceptionally long wooden sword which was above the average length of a Japanese sword (over four ''shaku'' long), instead of the normal length ''bokuto'' of around 2 45 ''Shaku''. Musashi's weapon of choice is also debated. One version say he was armed with only a half-finished bokuto, which Musashi was actually still carving as the duel began, and used it to overwhelm Gonnosuke without ever using the X-shaped block, instead hitting him lightly on the forehead as to demonstrate his superior stance in battle and emphasizing proper distance to an opponent, or ''ma-ai''. 

In any case, the essential part of the story is that Gonnosuke was defeated with relative ease. Gonnosuke became disillusioned at this sudden defeat together with the fact that Musashi had let him live even though he had been at his mercy. He would withdraw to a Shinto monastery to contemplate his defeat.

Seclusion, Jojutsu and the second duel
Gonnosuke withdrew to a Shinto shrine at Mount Homan in Chikuzen province, (modern-day, Fukuoka Prefecture), where he would practice daily in perfecting his swordsmanship, praying and performing shinto purifying rituals for 37 days. It is also said, however, that he spent several years on the road studying other martial arts in various dojos until he ended up in the Shinto-shrine. After one of his regular (exhausting) training sessions he collapsed from fatigue and reputably had a vision of a divine being in the form of a child, saying to Gonnosuke: &quot;know the solar plexus [of your opponent] with a round stick&quot;. In another version he had the vision in a dream late at night. He took it upon himself to create the jo deliberately longer than the average katana of the day, 128 cm as opposed to the swords total length of approx. 100 cm, and use that length to his advantage in a fight. Gonnosuke, drawing on his own considerable experience with the spear, longstaff, naginata and sword, also devised a set of five jo-techniques for use to counter and defeat a swordsman. Arguably he also developed techniques to specifically hinder Musashi's trade-mark x-block.

As the tradition goes, Gonnosuke, now armed with the jo, would again face Musashi in a duel and defeat him through the use of the superior length of the jo to keep Musashi's swords out of range of Gonnosuke and thus hinder him from using the X-shaped technique effectively. Gonnosuke had Musashi at his mercy but let him live as a way of returning the favour granted in the first duel. 

The claim that Musashi was ever defeated by Gonnosuke is still a matter for debate and is generally treated very skeptically.

Later life and legacy
The story continues right after the second duel. Gonnosuke, spending several more years on the road, part of the time with his new friend Musashi as his second, eventually took up residence in Fukuoka after being asked by the Kuroda clan to teach his jo-techniques to a selected few of their warriors. As the years progressed the original set of jo-techniques, by now expanded with new techniques since the days of Gonnosuke's duel with Musashi, became known as Shintō Musō-ryū. (or Shindō Musō-ryū) 

The modern day Shintō Musō-ryū survived both the ending of active fighting in Japan under the Tokugawa shogunate and the American-imposed post-World War II ban on martial arts; it is now an international martial art.

The memory of Muso Gonnosuke is honored at a jinja raised by Shimizu Takaji, one of the most prominent Shinto Muso-ryu jodoka until his death in 1978.

Sources for Muso Gonnosuke
The true origin of Gonnosuke is unknown; his traits and various exploits have, as with many martial artists and other famous samurai of the time, been exaggerated and/or constructed by later historians. A number of traditional founders of ''ryu'', or school of martial art, have been credited with having divine inspirations or visions, or in some cases even being taught by mythical creatures. One example is the famous samurai Minamoto no Yoshitsune who was supposedly taught by a Tengu - magical creatures of Japanese mythology, some possessing vast knowledge of weapons and martial arts.

The earliest known source of the first duel is the ''Kaijo Monogatari''. The entry in the ''Kaijo Monogatari'' was written in the 17th century but the exact year is debated. Author Kenji Tokitsu dates the ''Kaijo'' to 1666, but author Wayne Muromoto ;[http://www.furyu.com/archives/issue2/Muso.html] ''&quot;Muso Gonnosuke and the Shinto Muso-ryu Jo by Wayne Muromoto&quot;''; give the date of 1629. Another source is the ''Honcho Bugei Shoden'' (or ''Honcho Bugei Koden'') written in about 1716. The sources agree on the core of the story however; that Gonnosuke faced Musashi and was defeated, after which he retreated and formed his jo-techniques. The notion that Musashi was defeated in a rematch can be argued to have been a later construct by later pro-Gonnosuke historians, as there is no mentioning of a defeat in the sources regarding Musashi. The same could be said, however, for Musashi's followers who might have removed all mentioning of Musashi's defeat as a way to preserve his reputation. Another mentioning of the duel is found in the ''Niten-Ki'' which was compiled by Musashi's followers years after his death. There is only one known source mentioning the rematch. It is a scroll now preserved in Tsukuba Shrine in Ibaragi prefecture, although doubts of its contents has been raised, partially because there are no other known corroborating sources to confirm it.

Muso Gonnosuke in fiction
A fictional version of Muso Gonnosuke and his duels with Musashi are featured in the Eiji Yoshikawa's novel Musashi (novel). In the video game &quot; Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance&quot;, it is stated that Master Bo' Rai Cho helped Gonnosuke develop the Jojutsu style after his loss to Musashi. Bo' Rai Cho had used the Jojutsu style in &quot;Mortal Kombat: Deception&quot;, &quot;Mortal Kombat: Armageddon&quot;, and &quot; Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliace&quot;. It is also stated that Gonnosuke lost in his first &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; tournament, and that his soul was consumed by Shang Tsung.

Footnotes
2. * This X-shaped block is called jumonji (lit. cross) and is a fundamental technique of Musashi's Niten Ichi Ryu. When applying jumonji, it is important to consider which of the two swords is atop the other. This will greatly influence what manner of countermove is appropriate.

See also
* Bujutsu/Budo - The &quot;Way of War&quot; or the &quot;Way of the warrior&quot;.
* Daimyo - The aristocratic samurai landowner of feudal Japan. Employed samurai as warriors to expand their domains before and during the Sengoku Jidai period. Lasted until the Meiji restoration and abolishment of the feudal system.
*Edo Period - The age of peace under the rule of the Tokugawa Shogun's
* Iaido/Iaijutsu - Martial Art - The art of drawing the Japanese sword.
* Koryu - A term used to describe Japanese martial arts created before the 1868 Meiji restoration. Any art created that was created post-1868, such as Judo, Karate, Aikido, Taido, are considered to be Gendai Budo. Karate, although preceding 1868, does not qualify as koryu due to the fact it did not evolve in Japan but on the Ryūkyū Islands (modern Okinawa Prefecture) which did not become a part of Japan until the 17th century.
* Samurai - The warrior elite of feudal Japan. The Samurai caste was abolished in the Meiji restoration's aftermath.
* Seitei Jodo - Modern, compact version of SMR with 12 kata taught in the Zen Nihon Kendo Renmei.

References
;
;
;
*[http://www.fej.ch/en/shintomusoryu.htm European Jôdô Federation history section on SMR]
*[http://www.koryu.com/guide/muso.html Koryu.com entry]
*[http://www.koryu.com/library/wmuromoto2.html &quot;Nishioka Tsuneo and the Pure Flow of the Jo&quot; by Wayne Muromoto]
*[http://www.kampaibudokai.org/Jodo.htm KampaiBudokai article on SMR]
*[http://www.furyu.com/archives/issue2/Muso.html Muso Gonnosuke and the Shinto Muso-ryu Jo by Wayne Muromoto]
* Pascal Krieger: Jodô - la voie du bâton / The way of the stick (bilingual French/English), Geneva (CH) 1989, ISBN 2-9503214-0-2
*[http://www.koryubooks.com/library/dlowry11.html &quot;The Evolution of Classical Jojutsu&quot; by Dave Lowry]

External links
*[http://www1.linkclub.or.jp/~yukos/english/dazaifu/d11jodo.htm Shrine of Muso Gonnosuke] 
*[http://park5.wakwak.com/~asia/japan/joudou.htm Japanese site on the shrine of Muso Gonnosuke]

Category:Shinto Muso-ryu
Category:Japanese jojutsuka
Category:Martial arts school founders

fr:Gonnosuke Musō
ja:夢想権之助
nl:Muso Gonnosuke
pl:Muso Gonnosuke
fi:Musō Gonnosuke Katsuyoshi