
;



''The Hobbit, or There and Back Again'' is a story for children;;;;;; written by J. R. R. Tolkien in the tradition of the fairy tale. Tolkien wrote the story in the late 1920s initially to amuse his three sons, and draws on much of the authors professional knowledge of languages, especially Old English and its associated literature. It was first published on September 21, 1937 to wide acclaim. 

''The Hobbit'' is set in a time &quot;between the dawn of Faerie and the Dominion of Men&quot;,;; and follows the quest of home-loving Bilbo Baggins (the &quot;Hobbit&quot; of the title) as he leaves his comedic-rustic village and moves into darker, deeper territory;; along with the thirteen dwarves and wizard Gandalf. He encounters various denizens of the Wilderland, in order to reach and win his share of Smaug, the Dragon's, hoard. Through accepting the nature of his &quot;Tookish&quot; half (a disrespectable, romantic, fey and adventurous side of his family tree) and utilising both his wits and common sense during the quest, Bilbo develops a new level of maturity, competence and wisdom.;;

While ''The Hobbit'' stands in its own right, it is often marketed as a prelude to Tolkien's monumental novel ''The Lord of the Rings'', a sequel initiated by the publisher due to the success of the original and published 17 years later.The novel influenced the development of the modern genre of Fantasy literature, has been republished and adapted many times since its first edition.

Characters in ''The Hobbit''

*Bilbo List of hobbit families#Baggins|Baggins, the titular protagonist, a respectable, comfort-loving, middle-aged hobbit.
*Gandalf, an itinerant Wizard (Middle-earth)|wizard who introduces Bilbo to a company of thirteen Dwarf (Middle-earth)|dwarves and then disappears and reappears at key points in the story.
*Thorin Oakenshield, bombastic head of the company and heir to a dwarven kingdom under the Lonely Mountain.
*Smaug, a dragon who long ago pillaged the dwarven kingdom of Thorin's grandfather.

The plot involves a host of other characters of varying importance, such as the twelve other dwarves of the company; Elf (Middle-earth)|elves; Man (Middle-earth)|men (humans); Troll (Middle-earth)|trolls; Orc (Middle-earth)|goblins; giant spiders; Eagle (Middle-earth)|eagles; Wargs (evil wolves); Elrond the sage; Gollum, a mysterious creature inhabiting an underground lake; Beorn, a man who can assume bear-form; and Bard the Bowman, a heroic archer of Lake-town.

Synopsis
Gandalf tricks Bilbo into hosting a planning party for Thorin's band of dwarves, whose ambition is to reclaim the Lonely Mountain and its vast treasure from the Dragon (Middle-earth)|Dragon Smaug. During the council Gandalf unveils a map showing a secret door into the Mountain and proposes that the dumbfounded Bilbo be the expedition's &quot;burglar&quot;. The dwarves ridicule the idea, but Bilbo, indignant, joins despite himself.

The group travels into the wild, where Gandalf saves the company from trolls. Their path takes them into the Misty Mountains. There they are captured by goblins and driven deep underground. Though Gandalf frees them, Bilbo gets separated from the others as they flee the goblin tunnels. Groping along lost, he finds a ring and encounters Gollum, who engages him in a game of riddles. Bilbo wins, but Gollum, suspecting Bilbo has his precious ring, tries to kill him anyway. With the help of the ring, which confers invisibility, Bilbo escapes and rejoins the company. His success raises his reputation. Gandalf departs on a private errand, and the rest enter the black forest of Mirkwood, where Bilbo first saves the dwarves from giant spiders and then from the dungeons of the Wood-elves. By this time Bilbo is the de facto leader.

Nearing the Lonely Mountain, the travellers are welcomed by the human inhabitants of Lake-town, who hope the dwarves will fulfil prophecies of Smaug's demise. The expedition travels to the Mountain and finds the secret door; Bilbo scouts the dragon's lair, stealing a great cup and learning of a weakness in Smaug's armour. The enraged dragon, deducing that Lake-town aided the intruder, sets out to destroy the town. A noble thrush who overheard Bilbo's report of Smaug's vulnerability reports it to Bard the Bowman, who slays the Dragon.

When the dwarves take possession of the mountain, Bilbo finds the prized Arkenstone gem and hides it away. The Wood-elves and Lake-men besiege the Mountain and request compensation for their aid, reparations for Lake-town's destruction, and settlement of old claims on the treasure. Thorin refuses and, having summoned his kin from the north, reinforces his position. Bilbo tries to ransom the Arkenstone to head off a war, but Thorin is intransigent. He banishes Bilbo, and battle seems inevitable.

Gandalf reappears to warn all of an approaching army of goblins and Wargs. The dwarves, men, and elves band together, but only with the timely arrival of the eagles and Beorn is the Battle of Five Armies won. Thorin, mortally-wounded, lives long enough to part from Bilbo as friends. The treasure is divided fairly, but, having no need or desire for it, Bilbo refuses most of his contracted share. Nevertheless, he returns home with enough to make himself a very wealthy hobbit.

Concept and creation
=Writing=
In a 1955 letter to W. H. Auden, Tolkien recollects that in the late 1920s, when he was Professor of Anglo-Saxon at Pembroke College, he began ''The Hobbit'' when he was marking School Certificate papers. He found one blank page. Suddenly inspired he wrote the words &quot;In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit.&quot; He did not go any further than that at the time, although in the following years he drew up List of Middle-earth Dwarves#Thrór|Thrór's map, outlining the geography of the tale, and by January 1933 had finished the story: C. S. Lewis read it that month with great enthusiasm. It was eventually published when a family friend and student of Tolkien's named Elaine Griffiths was lent the typescript of the story in 1936. When Griffiths was visited in Oxford by Susan Dagnall, a staffmember of the publisher Allen &amp; Unwin|George Allen &amp; Unwin, she either lent Dagnall the book or suggested she borrow it from Tolkien (the sources are unclear). In any event,Miss Dagnall, impressed by it, showed the book to Stanley Unwin, who then asked his 10-year-old son Rayner to review it. Rayner wrote such an enthusiastic review of the book that it was published by Allen &amp; Unwin.

= Publication=
Dustcover of the first edition of ''The Hobbit''. This cover was designed by Tolkien himself, as was the binding illustrated at the top of this article.
George Allen &amp; Unwin, Ltd. of London published the first edition of ''The Hobbit'' on September 21, 1937. It was illustrated with many black-and-white drawings by Tolkien himself. The original printing numbered a mere 1,500 copies and sold out by December due to enthusiastic reviews.;; Houghton Mifflin of Boston and New York prepared an American edition to be released early in 1938 in which four of the illustrations would be colour plates. Allen &amp; Unwin decided to incorporate the colour illustrations into their second printing, released at the end of 1937.; Despite the book's popularity, wartime conditions forced the London publisher to print small runs of the remaining two printings of the first edition.

The first printing of the first English language edition can sell for between £6000;''The Hobbit sells for £6000'', bbc.co.uk, 26/11/04[http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/norfolk/4045667.stm];and £20,000 at auction.;Walne, Toby. ''How to make a killing from first editions'' Daily Telegraph 21/11/2007[http://www.telegraph.co.uk/money/main.jhtml?xml=/money/2007/11/20/cmbook20.xml]; , although the price has occasionally reached over £40,000.; ''The Hobbit breaks records at auction'' bbc.co.uk, 12/07/02[http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/arts/2125802.stm];

New English-language editions of The Hobbit|English-language editions of ''The Hobbit'' spring up often, despite the book's age, with at least fifty editions having been published to date. Each comes from a different publisher or bears distinctive cover art, internal art, or substantial changes in format. The text of each generally adheres to the Allen &amp; Unwin edition extant at the time it is published. In addition, the Hobbit has been translated into over forty languages. Some languages have seen multiple translations.

Revisions
In December 1937, Tolkien's publishers asked for a sequel, so the author began work on what would become the much larger ''The Lord of the Rings''.

In the first edition of ''The Hobbit'', Gollum willingly bets his magic ring on the outcome of the riddle-game, and he and Bilbo part amicably.;Anderson, ''The Annotated Hobbit'' (1988); During the writing of ''The Lord of the Rings'' Tolkien saw the need to revise these passages, in order to reflect his new concept of the ring and its powerful hold on Gollum. Tolkien tried many different passages in the chapter that would become chapter 2 of ''The Lord of the Rings'', &quot;The Shadow of the Past&quot;. Eventually Tolkien decided a rewrite of the Gollum encounter in ''The Hobbit'' was in order, and he sent a revised version to his publishers. He heard nothing further for years. When he was sent galley proofs of a new edition he learned to his surprise the new chapter had been incorporated as the result of a misunderstanding.;;

In ''The Lord of the Rings'', Tolkien Retcon#Addition|retroactively establishes that the events of ''The Hobbit'' take place during the &quot;Third Age&quot; of Middle-earth,;; a fictional prehistoric Earth.;;; He presents himself as the translator of the supposedly historic ''Red Book of Westmarch'', where Bilbo and Frodo's stories were recorded. In the book's prologue, as well as in the chapter &quot;The Shadow of the Past&quot;, Tolkienexplains the original version of the riddle-game as a &quot;lie&quot; that Bilbo made up because of the One Ring's influence on him, and which he originally wrote down in his diary, the basis of ''The Hobbit''. Revised versions of ''The Hobbit'' would contain the &quot;true&quot; version of events.;; This first revision became the second edition, published in 1951 in both UK and American editions.;

After an unauthorised edition of the Lord of the Rings was published by Ace in 1965, Houghton Mifflin and Ballantinerequested Tolkien to provide a new authorised text of the Hobbit, in order to re-assert US copyright control.;Rateliff, John D ''The History of the Hobbit. Part 2: Return to Bag-End'' p765; This text became the (1966) third edition.Tolkien took the opportunity to further adjust the narrative to conform with ''The Lord of the Rings'' and to unpublished ''Quenta Silmarillion'' as it stood at that time.;Anderson, ''The Annotated Hobbit'' (1988), Flies and Spiders, note 23;These minor changes included, for example, that the phrase ''elves that are now called Gnomes'' appears in the first;; and second;; editions on page 63. Tolkien had used &quot;Gnome&quot; in his earlier writing to refer to the second kindred of the High Elves – the Noldor (or &quot;Deep Elves&quot;). Tolkien thought that &quot;gnome&quot;, being derived from the Greek ''gnosis'' (knowledge), was a good name for the wisest of the Elves, but with its common denotation of a garden gnome, Tolkien ultimately replaced the phrase with ''High Elves of the West, my kin'' in the third edition.;;

In its final revision, ''The Hobbit'' still retains many differences in tone from ''The Lord of the Rings''. For example, goblins are more often referred to as Orcs in ''The Lord of the Rings''.;Anderson, ''The Annotated Hobbit'' (1988); Many of the inconsistencies arose because Tolkien wrote the Hobbit as a children's story having a loose relationship to his mythological writing, only later strengthening the connections through revisions and through its sequel.; Moreover, his concept of Middle-earth was to change and evolve throughout his life and writings.;Christopher Tolkien, ''The History of Middle-earth'';

= Publication of early drafts=

In May and June 2007, HarperCollins and Houghton Mifflin published ''The History of The Hobbit'' in the United Kingdom.Much like ''The History of Middle-earth'', ''The History of The Hobbit'' examines in two volumes previously unpublished original drafts of ''The Hobbit'' with extensive commentary by John Rateliff. In celebration and recognition of the 70th anniversary of ''The Hobbit'', ''The History'' was published in the United States on 21 September 2007, exactly 70 years after the initial publication of Tolkien's work.

Style
The basic form of the story is that of a quest, told in episodes. Tolkien fills the story with a wealth of incidental detail regarding minor characters and distant events which can make his imaginary world seem to have more depth. The narrative voice often addresses the reader directly, a device which the author himself came to dislike,;; yet is retained and lessened when Tolkien began in 1966 (and subsequently abandoned) an entire rewrite of ''The Hobbit'' to make a better tonal fit with its sequel.;Rateliff, John D. ''The History of the Hobbit. Part 2: Return to Bag End.'' p781; In a large part the narrative voice contributes significantly to the success of the novel, and lends it to being read aloud.

The novel draws on Tolkien's knowledge of historical languages and early European texts, the names of Gandalf and all but one of the thirteen dwarves being taken directly from the Old Norse poem &quot;Voluspa&quot; from the Elder Edda.;; and its illustrations (provided by the author) make use of Anglo-Saxon language|Anglo-Saxon runes. The story is filled with information on calendars and moon phases, detailed geographical descriptions that fit well with the accompanying maps — attention to detail that is also found in Tolkien's later work.

Major themes

The central character, Bilbo, is a modern anachronism exploring an essentially antique world, yet the character is able to negotiate and interact within it because of the connections between the modern and antique worlds through language and tradition. Gollum's riddles are taken from old historical sources, while those of Bilbo from modern nursery books. The familiar form of the riddle-game allows the two characters to discourse, rather than the content of the riddles themselves. This idea of a superficial contrast in characters' linguistic style leading to an understanding of the deeper unity is a constant recurring theme throughout ''The Hobbit''.;Shippey, Tom: ''Tolkien: Author of the Century'', HarperCollins, 2000, p.41;

''The Hobbit'' may be read as Tolkien's parable of the First World War, where the hero is plucked from his rural home, and thrown into a far off war where traditional types of heroism are shown to be futile;Carpenter, Humphrey: ''Tolkien and the Great War'', Review, The Times 2003 [http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/books/article1020455.ece ''Tolkien and the Great War'', Review, The Times 2003]; and as such explores the theme of heroism.

The Jungian concept of individuation is reflected through theme of growing maturity and capability, with the author seen to be contrasting Bilbo's personal growth against the lack of that of the dwarves.;

Greed plays a central role in the novel, with many of the episodes stemming from one or more of the characters simple desire for food (be it trolls eating dwarves, or dwarves eating Wood-elf fare) or a desire for beautiful objects, such as gold and jewels.;[http://www.bookrags.com/notes/hob/TOP1.htm ''The Hobbit'' on Bookrags];

Adaptations

March 1953 saw the first authorised adaptation — a production by St. Margaret's School, Edinburgh.;Anderson, Douglas, ''The Annotated Hobbit'', p.23; Since then ''The Hobbit'' has been adapted for other media many times.

BBC Radio 4 broadcast ''The Hobbit'' radio drama, adapted by Michael Kilgarriff, in eight parts (4 hours) from September to November 1968, which starred Anthony Jackson as narrator, Paul Daneman as Bilbo and Heron Carvic as Gandalf.

Nicol Williamson's abridged reading of the book was released on four LP records in 1974 by Argo Records.

''The Hobbit'', an animated version of the story, produced by Rankin/Bass, debuted as a television movie in the United States in 1977.

The American radio theatre company ''The Mind's Eye'' produced an audio adaptation of &quot;The Hobbit&quot; which was released on six one-hour audio cassettes in 1979. 

The BBC children's television series ''Jackanory'' presented an adaptation of ''The Hobbit'' in 1979.; [http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0771799/ Internet Movie Database: ''Jackanory'', &quot;The Hobbit&quot; (1979)]; Unusually for the programme, the adaptation had multiple storytellers. According to one of the narrators David Wood, the release of the production on video has been repeatedly stopped by the Tolkien Estate.;David Woods, website [http://www.stilesanddrewe.co.uk/david_wood_guestbook/guestbook/default.asp?PagePosition=11];

A three-part comic book adaptation with script by Chuck Dixon and Sean Deming and illustrated by David Wenzel was published by Eclipse Comics in 1989. A reprint collected in one volume was released by Del Rey Books in 2001.

Robert Inglis adapted and performed a one-man theatre play of ''The Hobbit''. This performance led to him being asked to read/perform the unabridged audiobook for ''The Lord of the Rings'' for Recorded Books in 1990. In 1991 he read the unabridged version of ''The Hobbit'' for the same company.

In 2001, Marjo Kuusela produced a ballet ''Hobitti'' (''The Hobbit'' in Finnish) with music by Aulis Sallinen for the Finnish National Opera.;;

In 2004 an operatic version of the story was written and had its world premiere in Canada. The score is currently being revised and will have its American premiere in the Spring of 2008 at the Sarasota Opera in Sarasota, Florida.

A live-action film version was announced on 18 December 2007, to be co-produced by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer|MGM and New Line Cinema, and produced by Lord of the Rings director Peter Jackson. It will be released in 2010, and shot simultaneously with another prequel. A director has not yet been named. ;;;http://www.tv3.co.nz/News/JacksonreturningtoMiddleEarth/tabid/209/articleID/42059/Default.aspx?ArticleID=42059; ''(See also The Lord of the Rings film trilogy#Prequels|The Lord of the Rings film trilogy: Prequels)''

=Games=
''The Hobbit'' has been the subject of several board games, including &quot;The Lonely Mountain&quot; (1984), &quot;The Battle of Five Armies&quot; (1984), and &quot;The Hobbit Adventure Boardgame&quot; (1997) all published by Iron Crown Enterprises.

Games Workshop released a &quot;Battle of Five Armies&quot; (2005) tabletop wargame using 10mm figures, based on their Warmaster rules.

Several computer and video games, both official and unofficial, have been based on the story. One of the first was ''The Hobbit'', an award winning (Golden Joystick Award for Strategy Game of the Year 1983) computer game developed in 1982 by Beam Software and published by Melbourne House for most computers available at the time, from the more popular computers such as the ZX Spectrum, and the Commodore 64, through to the Dragon 32/64|Dragon 32 and Oric computers. By arrangement with publishers, a copy of the novel was included with each game sold. Sierra Entertainment published a platform game titled ''The Hobbit'' in 2003 for Windows PCs, PlayStation 2, Xbox, and Nintendo GameCube. It was a similar version of which was also published for the Game Boy Advance.

See also
* The Quest of Erebor, Tolkien's backstory for the novel in ''Unfinished Tales''
* English-language editions of The Hobbit
* Early American editions of The Hobbit
* Translations of The Hobbit

References


*


External links



* [http://www.tolkien.co.uk/ The official Tolkien website.]
* [http://www.hobbit.ca/Library.html collection of edition covers, 1937 – 2005]
* [http://www.tolkienbooks.net/html/the_hobbit.htm Every UK edition of ''The Hobbit'']
* [http://www.tolkienlibrary.com/reviews/dutch-de_hobbit.htm Every Dutch edition of ''The Hobbit'']
* [http://www.tolkienlibrary.com/translations/hobbits/index.htm ''The Hobbit'' covers around the globe - gallery]





Category:1937 novels|Hobbit, The
Category:Middle-earth books|Hobbit, The
Category:The Hobbit| 
Category:British novels|Hobbit, The



an:O Hobbit
ast:El Hobbit
bg:Хобитът
ca:El hòbbit
cs:Hobit (kniha)
da:Hobbitten
de:Der kleine Hobbit
el:Το Χόμπιτ
es:El Hobbit
eo:La Hobito
fr:Bilbo le Hobbit
gl:O hobbit
ko:호빗
hr:Hobit (knjiga)
id:The Hobbit
ia:Le Hobbit
is:Hobbitinn
it:Lo Hobbit
he:ההוביט
la:Hobbit (liber)
lt:Hobitas (1937 knyga)
hu:A hobbit
mk:Хобитот
nl:De Hobbit
ja:ホビットの冒険
no:Hobbiten
nn:The Hobbit
pl:Hobbit, czyli tam i z powrotem
pt:O Hobbit
ro:Hobbitul
ru:Хоббит, или Туда и обратно
simple:The Hobbit
sk:Hobit (kniha)
sl:Hobit (roman)
fi:Hobitti eli sinne ja takaisin
sv:Bilbo - En hobbits äventyr
th:ฮอบบิท (หนังสือ)
tr:Hobbit (kitap)
zh:哈比人歷險記