
The De La Salle-Santiago Zobel School (DLSZ, De La Salle Zobel or Zobel) is a Catholic institution for boys and girls located in Muntinlupa City, Metro Manila, the Philippines.It was opened in 1978 by the De La Salle Brothers in the Philippines because of the increasing number of students in the grade school department of the former De La Salle College (Now, De La Salle University-Manila) in Manila.;[http://www.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/history.asp About Zobel : History] [http://www.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/history.asp zobel.dlsu.edu.ph] Accessed May 16, 2006;

Background
;
The first De La Salle School in the Philippines,De La Salle University-Manila|De La Salle College was opened on June 16, 1911 on Calle Nozaleda in Paco, Manila, at the request of the Archbishop of Manila, Jeremiah James Harty to the Brothers of the Christian Schools.It is interesting to note that Archbishop Harty had a very close affinity to La Salle since he was schooled in his grade school and high school years in the U. S. in De La Salle Christian Brother-run schools. In 1921, the school moved to its present site on De La Salle University-Manila|Taft Avenue and the Brothers have since opened schools in Greenhills, Mandaluyong City; Antipolo, Rizal; Lipa City, Batangas; Bacolod, Negros Occidental; Iligan, Lanao del Norte; Dasmariñas, Cavite and Alabang, Muntinlupa City.;[http://www.dlsu.edu.ph/brothers/delasalle-years.asp De La Salle: 1911-1986] [http://www.dlsu.edu.ph/history.asp dlsu.edu.ph] Accessed May 16, 2006;

History

Saint John Baptist de La Salle, the founder of the Christian BrothersDe La Salle-Santiago Zobel School, a member-school of De La Salle Philippines, Inc., was established on March 29, 1978 after it was decided that the elementary department of De La Salle University-Manila|De La Salle College be moved to a location that is more suitable and conducive to learning. A high school department was also formed to assure the graduates of Zobel's elementary department of placement in secondary education.;&quot;Zobel @ 25.&quot; ''Young Observer''. Jun-Nov 2006.;

The school is located in Muntinlupa's Ayala Alabang Village and was made possible through a joint donation of part of the campus's eleven hectare lot by the Ayala Corporation and the Madrigal Family, with the rest of the lot acquired through financing provided by the Filipinas Life Assurance Company.The school's location in Southern Metro Manila also helps in achieving the government's goal of dispersing educational institutions over the Metro, as well as the goal of the Brothers in the Philippines of making their resources available to as many communities as possible.;

De La Salle Zobel opened in June 1978 with an initial offering of Prep to Grade Six Levels.The Grade School Department became fully operational when Grade 7 was added in June 1979 and in June 1980, the High School Department opened, initially without Freshman classes.It became fully operational in June 1983.Br. Raymond Bronowicz FSC, then the Vice-President for Administration of De La Salle University-Manila, was appointed as Zobel's first director.;

In 1985, Brother V. Felix Masson FSC, who first came to the Philippines as a young De La Salle Christian Brother in 1938 and who survived the Japanese Occupation of the Philippines, was appointed to replace Brother Raymond as De La Salle Zobel's Director.

De La Salle Zobel departments

The management of Zobel is divided into six departments, all reporting directly to the Director, currently, Ronald D. Holmes, with the Director reporting directly to the President, Br. Armin Luistro FSC.A sub-unit, the Planning and Personnel Unit reports directly to the office of the Director.The school is also observed by an Internal Auditor that reports directly to the Board of Trustees of the school.;De La Salle-Santiago Zobel School. (2006). ''2006 student handbook''. Muntinlupa:DLSZ Institutional Development and Communications Office.;

= Academic and Information Services=

The Academic and Information Services Department is the consolidating unit for the six offices that provide academic support programs; it is headed by the Registrar:

#Information Systems/Technology Service—formerly the Information Technology Center, the Information Systems/Technology Service provides the information technology requirements of the school.It is responsible for maintenance of the school's computer laboratories as well as laptop computer rentals and the processing and printing of school ID cards.
#Institutional Development and Communications Office—formerly the Publications and Public Relations Office, this unit implements a comprehensive communication plan that ensures the efficient and effective dissemination of information to the school's internal and external stakeholders.Its list of publications include an ''Online Daily Bulletin'' and a printed ''Weekly Bulletin''.;[http://www.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/ICO.asp?disp=UNIT_DESCRIPTION Institutional Communications Office : Unit Description] [http://www.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph zobel.dlsu.edu.ph] Accessed September 7, 2006;
#Instructional and Performance Assessment Office—provides psychological testing services to provide accurate data on student and teacher performance.Its Guidance Office provides counseling, post-secondary education placement, career guidance, and leadership training services, among others.
#Registrar and Admissions Office—responsible for the updating and safekeeping of the academic and disciplinary records of all the students.It is also responsible for the implementation of the school curriculum, grading system, the determination of the honor rank of all the students, as well as liaising with the Department of Education, among others.

= Grade School Department=

The Grade School Department, which is headed by a Principal, is divided into three distinct sub-units that are each headed by an Assistant Principal.The Pre-School unit is responsible for the Junior and Senior Prep levels.The Lower Grades unit is responsible for Grades 1 through 3, while the Upper Grades unit is responsible for Grades 4 through 7.Also reporting to the Principal are the coordinators of the 9 subject areas that form part of the grade school school curriculum, as well as the head of the Learning Resource Center:
The Br. V. Felix Masson Hall
;
The Earth Science Laboratory at the St. La Salle Building
#''Araling Panlipunan'' (Social Studies) —the Social Studies program of the school provides the school's students with knowledge primarily about the history of the Philippines, as well as contemporary issues and concerns about Philippine society.
#Christian Living—the Christian Living program aims to instill Christian values to the students; included in the Christian Living program are discussions and lessons on the Holy Scriptures and the traditions of the Catholic Church.Also included in the curriculum is an organized Outreach Program.
#Filipino—the school's Filipino program aims to improve the students' ability to use the national language of the Philippines through individual and group learning programs that include listening, speech, reading, and writing.
#English Language Arts—this subject area has two components: Language and Reading.The Language component develops the student's English grammar and their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in the English language.The Reading component aims to develop its students into efficient readers that possess well-developed comprehension, vocabulary, work study, and literary appreciation skills.;Its activities include class chamber theatre performances, chorale readings, and establishing mini-libraries within each classroom.
#Math—Grade School Math begins with the teaching of basic mathematical relationships and consummates to the teaching of more complicated mathematical concepts, including topics in geometry, measurement, and word problems that involve real-life situations. 
#Music and Art;The respective Coordinators of the Music and Art, Physical Education, and Technology and Home Economics and Livelihood Education subject areas, as well as the Head of the Learning Resource Center are the same for both the Grade School and High School Departments and report to both the Grade School and High School Principals.;—The Grade School Music program develops the basic musical skills of the students through performing both vocally and musically; it is also primarily a music appreciation program.The Art program covers on the basic elements of art: line, shape, color, and space, and is centered on creativity through expression.;The Music program also allows grade school students to join the DLSZ Beginning Band, Beginning Strings, or the Grade School Chorale.Students who have joined these musical groups are exempted from the regular music program.
#Physical Education;—the Physical Education program aims to develop the students physically, mentally, emotionally, and socially by engaging the students in modified friendly sport competitions.
#Science—the Science program covers the teaching of living things, the earth, and the physical sciences.The program also includes laboratory instruction wherein the students are expected to develop their intellectual skills in observing, describing, comparing, classifying, measuring, communicating, making inferences, formulating hypotheses, controlling variables, predicting, and experimenting.;
#Technology and Home Economics and Livelihood Education (THELE);—The school's THELE program has two components, one is Home Economics and Livelihood Education, which is focused on helping students develop practical abilities related to food, clothing and grooming, home management and family living, gardening, handicrafts, technical drawing, and video production.Computer Education, the other component, focuses on aiding English and Math instruction for Grades 1 and 2; basic education, including touch typing for Grade 3; word processing and using spreadsheet and presentation programs for Grades 4 through 6; and web design and programming for Grade 7.
#Learning Resource Center;—responsible for the Division 1 and Antonio Montemayor Anievas Libraries of the school and provides conventional printed materials such as books, periodicals, journals, technical and specialized study materials, as well as non-print resources such as VCRs and projectors, available for use by the Grade School school community.

= High School Department=

The High School Department is headed by a Principal and is assisted by an Assistant Principal.The Adult Night High School is also under the High School Department.The following are the 9 subject areas that form part of the high school curriculum:
The DLSZ Chorale in Concert
Swimming Pool
Computer Laboratory 3 at the St. La Salle Building
;
Students of the Introduction to Sewing course
#''Araling Panlipunan'' (Social Studies) —departing from the Philippine history-focused Grade School program, the High School Social Studies offers Asian History as the focus of study for Freshmen, including a comparative analysis of the history and cultures of the Asian peoples.Sophomores are offered World History and Culture while Juniors and Seniors are offered Introductory Macro- and Microeconomics, respectively.A special Social Studies program is also offered for students who have little or no knowledge of Filipino.
#Christian Living—The First Year course offering in Christian Living consists an Introduction to Bible Study and the Old and New Testaments.The Second Year course offering includes Ecclesiology and the Sacraments of the Catholic Church while the Junior Year offering is composed of an Introduction to Christian Philosophy, an Introduction to Ethical tradition#Christian ethics|Christian Ethics, and Social Justice.The Senior Year course is Christian Family Life and Foundations of Christian Morality.;[http://www.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/hscl.ASP?DISP=OFFERINGS Christian Living : Course Offerings] [http://www.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph zobel.dlsu.edu.ph] Accessed September 7, 2006;
#English—The Freshman English course includes topics on English grammar that include topics on sentence construction and cohesive devices as well as the literature of Asia and Africa.The Sophomore course is focused on composition-writing and includes discussions on British and North American literature.The grammar component of the Junior course focuses on speaking, listening, reading, and writing, more specifically, writing essays, poetry, narratives, and summaries; the Reading component introduces the students to different literary genres from all over the world.Fourth Year English includes lessons that concentrate on research writing as well as a discussion of selections from World literature.
#Filipino—The Filipino program for the First and Second Years focuses on Filipino grammar and analytical reading in Filipino.Freshmen students take up Francisco Balagtas's ''Florante at Laura'' while Sophomore students take up Dr. José P. Rizal's ''Noli Me Tangere'' (The Social Cancer).Third and Fourth Year Filipino focuses on analytical thinking through a critical reading and analysis of different literary genres that have been translated to Filipino.;[http://www.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/HSFILIPINO.ASP?DISP=OFFERINGS Filipino : Course Offerings] [http://www.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph zobel.dlsu.edu.ph] Accessed September 7, 2006;Rizal's ''El Filibusterismo'' (Subversion) is also discussed in this course.Other novels, such as Lualhati Bautista's ''Dekada '70'' and ''Bata, Bata Paano Ka Ginawa'' have also been discussed.
#Math—The High School Math program covers topics in Algebra, which is offered to First through Forty Year students;Statistics, which is offered to Freshmen; Trigonometry, which is offered to Sophomores and Juniors, and Geometry.Topics in Freshman Algebra include Rational Expressions and Linear Equations in both One and Two Variable while Sophomore Algebra focuses on Systems of Linear Equations and Roots and Radicals, among others.Junior Algebra includes topics on Exponents and Radicals and Quadratic Equations and Inequalities while Senior Year Algebra is Advanced Algebra and Precalculus.A special Mathematics program for the top 12% Math students from the Top 40 students of each year level is also offered.
#Music and Art;—The Freshman Music course covers the rudiments of music, including rhythm, melody, and harmony, while the Sophomore course is Asian Music with an emphasis on Philippine Music.Third Year Music is History of Western Music with emphasis on Perceptive Listening, while the Senior course is Composition, where the fourth year students are given the opportunity to compose their batch and graduation songs.;[http://www.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/HSMUSIC.ASP?DISP=OFFERINGS General Music : Course Offerings] [http://www.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph zobel.dlsu.edu.ph] Accessed September 7, 2006;High School students may also choose to audition for the Symphony Orchestra, String Orchestra, Chorale, Rondalla, or Flute Ensemble, and should they be accepted, would be exempted from taking the general music course.The Art program offers a Basic Drawing course for Freshmen, a Calligraphy course for Sophomores, a Sculpture course for Juniors, and Advertising Art for Seniors.
#Physical Education;—Physical Education for Freshmen is Softball, Physical Fitness and Drug Education, the Sophomore course is Drug Education and Volleyball, the Junior course is Weight Training, Basketball, and Basketball Officiating, while the Senior course is Weight Training and Baseball, Volleyball, and Basketball.Physical Fitness Tests are administered at all levels during the first and third terms and one academic term is allotted for swimming, that covers Freestyle, Breaststroke,Backstroke, and Butterfly stroke swimming over four years.
#Science—Freshman Science is Biology, Sophomore Science is Introduction to higher Chemistry while Junior and Senior students are offered Physics.All courses in Science are supplemented by laboratory classes.
#Technology and Home Economics and Livelihood Education (THELE);—The THELE program is broken into Computer Science and Home Economics (HE).Freshmen HE is Introduction to Sewing, which include parts and uses of the sewing machine and hand stitching, as well as Handicrafts.HE for Sophomores is Culinary Arts, particularly Basic Nutrition, Food Service Management, Table Etiquette, and Food Preparation.Junior HE is Practical Electricity while Senior HE is Driver's Education.Computer Science for Freshmen is Introduction to Web Technology and deals on web site development using HTML scripts and visual effects using Macromedia Flash MX; Sophomore Computer Science is a course on simple application development using Visual Basic 6.0 and basic SQL.Computer Science for Juniors focuses on the syntax and constructs of the C/C++ programming language and Senior Year Computer Science is Introduction to JavaScript.
#Learning Resource Center;—responsible for the Jacobo Santiago Zobel Memorial Library and provides conventional printed and non-print resources to the high school community.

= Center for Lasallian Formation and Development=
The Center for Lasallian Formation and Development, formerly the Lasallian Programs office consolidates activities regarding the school's Alumni Affairs, outreach programs, extracurricular activities, and the students' co-curricular activities, among others.;The publication of the school's two organs, the ''Young Observer'', for the Grade School Department, and ''Counterpoint'' for the High School Department are also under the purview of this department.

= Administrative services=

The Administrative Services Department is responsible for the upkeep, maintenance, and security of the campus and the school's equipment and facilities as well as the recruitment, hiring, training and development of the academic and co-academic personnel.;The Offices of Campus Development and Campus Services report to the Director of Administrative Services.

= Controller=

The Controller is responsible for the financial health of the school.

Academics

Two main departments make up the academic structure of Zobel, the Grade School and High School Departments.The Grade School curriculum is structured into six learning areas: Mathematics, Science, Language, Reading, Filipino, and ''MAKABAYAN'', the component subjects of which are Christian Living, ''Araling Panlipunan'' (Social Studies), Computer Science, Music and Art, Physical Education, and Home Economics and Livelihood Education.

The High School curriculum, on the other hand, is composed of ten subject areas, which are: Christian Living, English, ''Araling Panlipunan'', Filipino, Science, Math, Music and Art, Physical Education, and Technology and Home Economics.

The school also encourages its students to participate in academic contests, which serve as enrichment opportunities.Zobel has been a consistent top performer in academic contests such the Metrobank-Mathematics Teachers Association of the Philippines-Department of Education Math Challenge, the Discovery Channel Whiz Quiz Contest,numerous AMA Computer University Information Technology Contests, and the Inter-school Computer Science QuizBits Contest of the Philippine Science High School, among others.;;[http://dailybulletin.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/archives/00000197.htm Daily Bulletin Online] [http://dailybulletin.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/ dailybulletin.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph] Accessed May 16, 2006;;[http://dailybulletin.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/archives/00000161.htm Daily Bulletin Online] [http://dailybulletin.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/ dailybulletin.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph] Accessed May 16, 2006;;[http://dailybulletin.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/archives/archive-022004.htm Daily Bulletin Online] [http://dailybulletin.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/ dailybulletin.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph] Accessed May 16, 2006;

Performing arts

The DLSZ Symphony Orchestra during Zobel's 25th Anniversary concertWith the thrust of supporting the holistic development of students, Zobel further developed the intellect and artistry of its students with the establishment of the Angelo King Center for the Performing Arts in 2000, which is housed in the school's Center for the Performing Arts Building.;De La Salle-Santiago Zobel School. (2000). ''Primer to the Angelo King Center for the Performing Arts''. Muntinlupa: DLSZ Printing Office.;Since its establishment, the Center has organized yearly ''Performing Arts Festivals'' which have showcased the different performing arts groups of the school.These groups include the DLSZ Symphony Orchestra, the DLSZ Chorale, the Rondalla Ensemble and in addition, the Center continues to hold yearly productions of hit musicals, a tradition started during the early years of Zobel.Some of the more notable productions of the school include ''Fiddler on the Roof'' (1998), which was directed by Philippine theater mainstay Zenaida Amador, ''The Sound of Music'' (1995), and ''Annie'' (1992), both directed by Tony Espejo. 

It has also hosted a number of performing groups from DLSU-Manila such as the DLSU Pops Orchestra, the DLSU Chorale, and the Chamber Ensemble.Activities, which have been organized at the Center, have been facilitated by highly acclaimed organizations including the UP Theater Arts, CenterStage, and the Royal Academy of Dance.In 2002, Don Randi, an American jazz musician held a jazz and fusion clinic and concert at the Center.;[http://www.inq7.net/gbl/2002/sep/20/gbl_7-1.htm US artist to conduct jazz clinics, concerts] [http://news.inq7.net news.inq7.net] September 19, 2002;

Athletics

Zobel's varsity team, the De La Salle Junior Archers, is De La Salle's junior representative to the University Athletic Association of the Philippines while its women's team, the Lady Junior Archers, is De La Salle's representative to the Women's National Collegiate Athletic Association.During UAAP Season 68, the Junior Archers won its first UAAP title when it swept the UPIS Junior Maroons, 2-0.;[http://dailybulletin.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/archives/archive-102005.htm Daily Bulletin Online] [http://dailybulletin.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/ dailybulletin.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph] Accessed August 9, 2006;It was also De La Salle's first Junior title in either the NCAA or the UAAP since the De La Salle Greenies of De La Salle College High School (Taft) won the championship in the NCAA in 1955 which was captained by La Salle Basketball Hall-of-Famer Kurt Bachmann.The De La Salle Lady Junior Archers, on the other hand, have been the WNCAA Junior Division Champions for eight straight years, from 1993 to 2000 and again in 2004.The Zobel's varsity team for Football on the other hand wins many tournaments and leagues.

Learning Resource Center

Jacobo Santiago Zobel Memorial Library
Antonio Montemayor Anievas Memorial Library
Division 1 Library
The school currently has 3 Learning Resource Centers, one each for the Prep Level, the Grade School Department, and the High School Department, that provide both conventional print and non-print materials to the school community.In addition to these Centers, the school also maintains an Archives unit that is also under Learning Resource Center; the Archives is located at the St. La Salle Building.

= Jacobo Santiago Zobel Memorial Library=

The Jacobo Santiago Zobel Memorial Library is the school's primary library and serves the High School Department.The library has two main sections, print and non-print.In 2005, it served 1,128 students, 89 faculty members, 13 administrators, and 82 co-academic personnel.;De La Salle-Santiago Zobel Libraries. (2006). ''LRC Tidbits''. Muntinlupa: DLSZ Printing Office.;It is located at the basement of the St. La Salle Building.It has the following in its collection:

* 29,212 book titles in 33,244 volumes
* 5,831 Audio-Visual materials
* 306 Audio-Visual equipment
* 122 bound periodical titles in 1,009 volumes
* 45 subscriptions of magazines and academic journals for the students and 21 titles for the faculty
* 4 English daily newspapers and 2 in Filipino

= Antonio Montemayor Anievas Library=

The Antonio Montemayor Anievas Library serves the Grade School Department and is located just across the Santiago Zobel Memorial Library.It is the second biggest library on campus and has organized various programs, which serve to inculcate the love of reading for the Grade School students such as the Book Lovers and Catch Them Read Programs.;Its librarians are also advisers to the Library Club and the Media Society.

= Division 1 Library=

The Division 1 Library serves the Prep levels as well as Grades 1 through 3 of the school.It is located in the St. Br. Miguel Hall and is the newest library on campus.This library was first housed at the Prep Building, which has since been demolished and replaced by the Br. V. Felix Masson and Br. Miguel Halls.

Adult Night High School

The Adult Night High School was opened as a form of outreach to the underprivileged who would want to finish their high schooling.It was established during School Year 1997-1998 during the term of Dr. Judith Aldaba.Classes were first held at the Putatan Elementary School and was composed of 69 students in two freshman classes with ages ranging from 14 to 41.Classes were relocated to the Alabang Elementary School during the following schoolyear.In 1999, classes were held at the main campus of De La Salle Zobel.;[http://www.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph/anhs.asp?disp=HISTORY History of the Adult Night High School] [http://www.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph zobel.dlsu.edu.ph] Accessed August 16, 2006;Its first Director was Evangeline de Peralta.

Campus

700px

The campus is situated on an irregularly-shaped lot located at the heart of the Ayala Alabang Village.The campus's master plan was designed by the firm of Filipino architect, Francisco Mañosa.In the master plan, the main objective was the creation of a unified learning environment, with the school grounds having a countryside atmostphere.In this view, alterations to the natural elements of the lot were kept at a minimum.;[http://www.manosa.com/dlsz.htm De La Salle Zobel] [http://www.manosa.com/ manosa.com] Accessed May 16, 2006;

When the school opened in 1978, there was only one building available for use, the St. La Salle Building, then called the &quot;Main Building.&quot;At present, the campus is composed of a number of structures which have been necessitated by the burgeoning school population.The following major buildings are found on campus:

= St. La Salle Building=

The façade of the St. La Salle Building (Main Building) of DLSZThe first building on the campus, it houses the Grades 4 to 7 classes as well as the Freshmen to Junior classes.The basement level, which was formerly a canteen-cum-multi-purpose hall was turned into the school's ''Learning Resource Center'' in 1992.It is composed of two libraries: the Antonio Montemayor Anievas Memorial Library (High School) and the Jacobo Santiago Zobel Memorial Library (Grade School), audio-visual rooms, the School Archives, and the libraries' Non-Print Center.

In 2005, the central garden separating the Grade School and High School laboratories was converted into a ''Cyber Nook'' which houses a considerable number of computers available for use by the school community.

The façade with the statue of St. La Salle and the flagpole|leftThe ground floor also once housed the offices of the Registrar, the Director, and the Grade School Principal.These offices have since been moved to the newly-renovated Mutien-Marie Wiaux Building.At present, the Main Chapel, the Deborah Decena Auditorium, the amphitheater, the Information Systems Office, the medical and dental clinics, and the office of the School Chaplain may be found at the ground floor.

The second floor of the St. La Salle Building once housed the School Library, but with its transfer to the basement, the former library space is now home to the Faculty Rooms, as well as to the offices of the different Subject Coordinators.All of ''Zobels science laboratories are also found on the second floor, as well as one computer laboratory.The offices of the Teachers' Union and the Adult Night High School are also found on the second floor.

On the third floor are three computer laboratories and the office of the High School Assistant Principal.Also found within the St. La Salle Building are two pocket gardens, as well as a botanical garden at the rear of the building.All classrooms in this building are equipped withLCD projectors and computers with connection to the Internet.

= Saint Brother Mutien-Marie Building=

In 2005, the Administration Building or the St. Brother Mutien-Marie Building, underwent a total renovation.It was one of the earliest building on campus and now houses all the administrative offices of Zobel including the offices of the Director, the Grade School Principal, the High School Principal, the Registrar, and the Accounting Department.Prior to its renovation, it housed the Sewing and Cooking classes of the high school Freshmen and Sophomores, and it featured a mock-up of a house's living room and bedroom.It featured a fully-equipped kitchen that was capable of handling four sets of ''student-chefs'' as well as a classroom that was equipped with 50 sewing machines.These classes have since been moved to the St. Joseph Building

The building is named after St. Brother Mutien-Marie Wiaux, a De La Salle Christian Brother who taught St. Bertuin’s School in Malonne, Belgium where he taught for fifty-eight years.He was canonized in 1989 by Pope John Paul II.

= St. Joseph and THELE Buildings=

The stained glass marker of the St. Joseph BuildingNamed after one of the most famous carpenters in history, the St. Joseph Building is home to all of the school's ''Home Economics and Livelihood Education'' classes, including ''Shop'', ''Automotive/Driving'', ''Practical Gardening'', ''Practical Electricity'', ''Cooking'', and ''Sewing'', among others.In 2004, an annex, the THE Building, was built to decongest the original building which was built in 1992.The building houses the Automotive/Driving and Electricity classes at the ground floor, including the garage for the class vehicles, while a gym (Gym 3) occupied the second floor.In 2005, a model home was built by the back of the original building to house the Cooking and Sewing classes.The original building once housed art classes as well as rehearsal rooms for the DLSZ Band and doubles as transient offices for some of the school's units while some buildings on campus are undergoing renovation. For school year 2007-2008, the THELE building has been transformed to a Seniors (4th year) building due to the many other students that applied during its enrollment period thus adding section I to some of the Grade and High School levels.;

= Brother Flavius Leo FSC Hall=

The Br. Flavius Leo FSC Hall, which houses the school's main canteen was built in 1991 with the initial food service management being handled by ''The Aristocrat'' Restaurant of Engracia Reyes.The immediate past handler of the canteen management was Race Foods, Inc. and at present, it is handled by La Casita, which also handles management of the DLSU-Manila canteens at the Enrique M. Razon Sports Center and the Br. Andrew Gonzalez Hall.The canteen is fully air-conditioned and also houses a Teachers' Lounge.While this is the main school canteen, a mini-canteen is also located in the Br. Felix Hall.It was named after Br. Flavius Leo FSC, one of the De La Salle Brothers in the Philippines#The Massacre of February 12.2C 1945|sixteen Christian Brothers who were massacred in the Most Blessed Sacrament Chapel of De La Salle University-Manila on Taft Avenue, Manila during the Battle for the Liberation of Manila in World War II.

= Br. V. Felix Masson and St. Br. Miguel Halls=

The driveway to the St. Br. Miguel Hall|leftThe Br. V. Felix Masson Hall is named after one of the longest-serving Christian Brothers in the Philippines and, after the recent deaths of Br. Fidelis Leddy FSC(1918-2003) and Br. J. Benedict FSC(1927-2004), the only living American Christian Brother who has been serving in the Philippines for more than fifty years.;[http://www.dlsaa.com:8081/dlsaaPublic/brben/eduardo.html A Tough Act to Follow] [http://www.dlsaa.com:8081/ De La Salle Alumni Association] Accessed May 16, 2006;This building was built in 1997 and houses the Junior Prep to Third Grade levels and in 2004, the St. Br. Miguel building was built right next to the Br. Felix Hall to accommodate the pre-school levels.The Br. Felix Hall building houses classrooms, laboratories, and a library for the Grade School Department as well as the offices of the Grade School Principal.

The newly-built St. Brother Miguel Hall, named after St. Br. Miguel Febres Cordero Muñoz FSC, houses a pre-school playground, a library for the pre-school, a multi-purpose hall, a clinic, a faculty room for the Grade School and Pre-school levels, and an amphitheater.These buildings sit on the area that was once occupied by the Prep Building, which housed the Junior and Senior Prep levels of the school, and was also named after St. Br. Miguel Febres Cordero.

= Vaugirard=

The bridge leading to the entrance of the VaugirardThe Recollection House, officially known as The Vaugirard, is a gated compound which is place of contemplation and is where most official school recollections and retreats are held.It is located at the far Western end of the campus and is physically secluded from the main grounds by extensive gardens and foliage.It is named after Vaugirard, France, the location where St. John Baptist De La Salle founded his first novitiate.;[http://www.catholic-forum.com/Saints/ncd04390.htm Saint John Baptist de La Salle] [http://www.catholic-forum.com/Saints/ncd04390.htm New Catholic Dictionary] Accessed May 16, 2006;A house was built there by the Brothers to serve as a venue wherein they could meet to strengthen their relationships through fellowship and prayer.;[http://www.dasma.dlsu.edu.ph/offices/ULFO/program.htmUniversity Lasallian Family Office - Formation Programs] [http://www.dasma.dlsu.edu.ph/ dasma dlsu.edu.ph] Accessed May 16, 2006;The ground floor of the Vaugirard also served as an erstwhile faculty room for some of the Grade School faculty while the St. Br. Miguel Hall was being constructed.

= Cadlum Hall=

The Independent Teachers Union garden in front of Cadlum HallBuilt at the site of the former stand-alone Gym 2, the Cadlum Hall was built to house a multi-purpose hall and the school bookstore at the ground floor, with the Gym 2 being converted to a dedicated basketball court at the second floor.Its front lawn features a garden, which was donated by the Teachers' Union, as well as a gazebo, which housed the former offices of the school's yearbook the ''Green, Gold, and White''.The hall is located right beside the canteen.

At present, the multi-purpose hall also doubles as office space with the following units as occupants:
*Alumni &amp; Development Office 
*Lasallian Formation Office 
*Campus Ministry Office 
*Social Action Office 
*Student Activity Office 

It also houses classrooms for Remedial English.The building is named after the longest-serving Principal of Zobel, Edgardo S. Cadlum.;De La Salle-Santiago Zobel School. (1997). ''96-'97 Grade School Green, Gold, and White''. Muntinlupa;

= Angelo King Center for the Performing Arts=

The façade of the Angelo King Center for the Performing Arts|leftIn 1996, the school began construction on a building which would house its proposed Center for the Performing Arts.In 2000, this building was completed and would be named after Angelo King, who had contributed a significant amount to help finish its construction.;The Angelo King Center has a Php150 million theater equipped with state-of-the-art lights and sound facilities, which were imported form Germany.The theater has a seating capacity of 1,052 with balcony and orchestra sections, a two-level lobby, an orchestra pit, four air-conditioned dressing rooms, costume cabinets, a docking area, sixteen fly battens, two motorized curtain systems (vertical and horizontal), and comfort rooms.;[http://www.dlsaa.com:8082/system/otherCampuses.html Other Campuses] [http://www.dlsaa.com:8082/ De La Salle Alumni Association] Accessed May 16, 2006;The television program ''Digital LG Quiz'', taped their episodes at the King Center Theater from Seasons 2 to 4.

The building houses the rehearsal rooms of the performing arts groups of the school, as well as the music and art classrooms.There are also two box offices located in the building, one at the ground level of the lobby, and one at the upper level, just by the dance studio.The Performing Arts Center is currently under complete renovation of the main theater.

= Athletic facilities=
Football FieldThere are four gymnasiums located around the campus. Gym 1, the second building on campus and the first gymnasium constructed, is also the largest. Besides it being used for most of the Physical Education classes, it is also used for institutional gatherings such as Eucharistic celebrations. For smaller gatherings, the King Center Theater is usually used. Gym 4 is located right beside Gym 1 and hosues badminton and table tennis courts. It also houses the offices of the Physical Education Department as well as a fully-equipped weight training room.

The campus is also home to an Olympic-size swimming pool which was constructed in the mid-1990s. In 2005, the pool house was rebuilt and is now a multi-level building with locker rooms at the ground floor and spectator-stands at the upper level. Right beside the swimming pool are the tennis courts, one of the oldest facilities located on campus.

The school also has a full-sized Football field, which is located behind the Mutien-Marie Building, as well as baseball and softball fields, which are located by The Vaugirard. Because of these facilities, Zobel has been host to many athletic competitions, especially soccer matches, including the much awaited match-ups between De La Salle Zobel, Ateneo de Manila and brother-La Salle schoolLa Salle Green Hills.

= Campus access=

Access to the campus is facilitated through eight gates, although the access is usually routed through Gates 1, 2, 3, 4, and 7.

School seal

The school seal is an integral part of the school's identity.It is made up of the following: 
;
*The ''double A'', which divides the bottom part of the shield, is derived from the logo of the Ayala Corporation, which donated the land on which the school stands.

*The bottom center bears the ''star of faith'', or Signum Fidei, which is taken from the official seal of the De La Salle Brothers and below it are the ''three broken chevrons'', which are taken from the coat of arms of the De La Salle family.

*A ''palm branch with 16 leaves'' at the shield's bottom left pays tribute to the sixteen De La Salle Christian Brothers who were De La Salle Brothers in the Philippines#The February 12.2C 1945 Massacre|massacred in Manila during its liberation by American forces in 1945.

*The bottom right section bears a ''seashell'', which is the iconographic symbol of St. James, who was the patron saint of Santiago Zobel, after whom the school was named.''Three small stars'' at the corners of this part of the shield are taken from the Coat of arms of the Philippines.

*The upper section of the shield contains a ''cross and rays'', which serve as reminders that a Lasallian education should lead every student to Christ and to spread the Good News of God's Kingdom.

*Above the shield is a ''dove'' with spread wings.This signifies peace as well as the Holy Spirit.

*The school seal is depicted in colors of green, gold, and white. ''Green'' represents hope and confidence, while ''gold'' represents love and ''white'' represents peace and purity of faith and morals,

Santiago Zobel
Jacobo Santiago &quot;Santi&quot; Zobel, namesake of De La Salle ZobelJacobo Santiago &quot;Santi&quot; Zobel, after whom the school is named, was the eldest son of De La Salle Alumnus and Benefactor-Don Enrique Zobel.Enrique Zobel was then the President of the Ayala Corporation when De La Salle Zobel was established.Santiago was born on August 15, 1954 and died of pneumonia on September 7, 1965 at the age of 11.

Notable De La Salle Zobel alumni
* Alan Peter Cayetano (GS '85, HS '89) —Representative, Lone District of Taguig-Pateros, Senator (2007) ;

;
* Ricardo Carlos &quot;Rico&quot; Yan (HS '92) —Movie and Television Personality
* Bianca Gonzalez (GS '96, HS '00) —ABS-CBN and Studio 23 Personality
* Patty Laurel (HS '00) —Studio 23 Personality
* Sam Oh (HS '98) — TV host(ETC)
* Richard Gutierrez (HS '02) —Model, Actor, and GMA Network Personality
* Rhian Ramos(HS '08) —GMA Network Personality
* Mariel Rodriguez, (Ma. Erlinda Termulo) [HS '02]— ABS-CBN Personality
* Alvin Aguilar (HS '91) - President and Founder of the Universal Reality Combat Championships (URCC), Martial Artist
* Basti Artadi (HS '91) - Lead vocalist, Wolfgang (Filipino band)
* Rayan Khan (HS' 01) - Lead vocalist, Sex Balls

References and notes
;
;
;

External links
* [http://www.zobel.dlsu.edu.ph De La Salle-Santiago Zobel School]
* [http://www.lasallian.ph Philippine Lasallian Family] 
* [http://www.dlsaa.com De La Salle Alumni Association] 







Category:Educational institutions established in 1978
Category:De La Salle Philippines
Category:Lasallian educational institutions
Category:High schools in the Philippines
Category:University Athletic Association of the Philippines

tl:De La Salle-Santiago Zóbel School