;

|designation= 
|latitude = 
|longitude= 
|architect= Frank Gehry
|owner= City of Chicago
|capacity = 11,000 (4,000 fixed, 7,000 lawn);;
|type = 
|opened = 2004-07-16
|yearsactive= 2004-present
|rebuilt= 
|closed = 
|othernames = 
|production = 
|currentuse = Performing arts
|website= 
}}

Jay Pritzker Pavilion, Pritzker Pavilion, or Pritzker Music Pavilion is a band shell in the Loop community area of Chicago in Cook County, Illinois, United States. The Frank Gehry-designed pavilion, named for Pritzker family member Jay Pritzker, was constructed between June 1999 and July 2004 in Millennium Park.; It is located on the south side of Randolph Street directly across from some of the tallest buildings in the world and east of the Chicago Landmark Historic Michigan Boulevard District.

It is the park's outdoor performing arts venue and the new home of the Grant Park Symphony Orchestra and Chorus. As home of the Grant Park Symphony Orchestra and Chorus it is also the home of the Grant Park Music Festival, the nation's only remaining free outdoor classical music series. The structure is built partially atop the Harris Theater for Music and Dance, the park's indoor performing arts venue.;; It serves as the centerpiece for the park that was opened on July 16 2004.;;

The performance venue is designed with a large fixed seating area, a great lawn, a trellis network to support the sound system and a signature Gehry stainless steel headdress. It features a sound system with an innovative acoustic design that replicates an indoor concert hall sound experience.The pavilion and the park in general are well-known and respected for their accessibility.;;

Details

The pavilion includes 4,000 fixed seats andgreat lawn that accommodates an additional audience of 7,000.; The pavilion features aproscenium theatre with a brushed stainless steel headdress. The main stage, which can accommodate a full orchestra and chorus of 150 members,; is connected by this frame to a trellis of interlocking crisscrossing steel pipes that support the sound system. The innovative sound system distributes sound to mimic indoor concert hall acoustics.;; The trellis is .;; The cost of the project was $60 million.;; The structure is named after Jay Pritzker, a prominent Chicago businessman from the Pritzker family, who own the Hyatt Hotels.;; The family contributed $15 million to the construction.;;

The development follows a series of open-air projects by Guggenheim Museum Bilbao designer, Frank Gehry, such as the Merriweather Post Pavilion in Columbia, Maryland, the Concord Performing Arts Center in Concord, California, and numerous renovations to the Hollywood Bowl in Hollywood, California. The structure is also a part of a larger inner city redevelopment that includes a theater, extensive gardens and a Gehry-designed serpentine pedestrian footbridge that buffers against street noise.; The redevelopment was part of an effort to overcome unsightly railroad tracks and parking lots.;; Much like his Experience Music Project in Seattle, Washington, it suggests musical qualities. The trellis design was an effort to avoid the traditional obstructing forest of speaker towers.;;

The original design was much more modest. It had a smaller shell structure and speakers affixed to poles interspersed throughout the seating area. However, two things happened to change the original plans. John H. Bryan, former CEO of the Sara Lee Corporation, raised revenues to change the scope of the project. Also, Jay Pritzker's widow was unimpressed with the design and demanded that Gehry be involved.; Despite the redesign, the pavilion has its blemishes: the supporting backside along Randolph Street is a bit controversial, and the fact that the supporting proscenium braces are left exposed bothers some observers.;;

The Millennium Park director has been honored for his contribution to the America more accessible.The stage is accessible by gently-sloped ramps instead of stairs as part of the overall parks accessibility aware design.;

=Acoustics=
The pavilion band shell is designed to reflect sound for optimal acoustics.
Speakers close up
Pritzker uses an innovative LARES sound system that generates reflected and reverberant energy that surrounds the audience. The system causes the sound quality to be fairly uniform throughout the entire venue. The system has received critical acclaim for adaptations of its technologies such as signal processing in a variety of indoor and outdoor venues.;;; The Pritzker Pavilion is the first permanent outdoor installation of the LARES system in the United States. The trellis serves acoustic and architectural purposes because it allows for the precise placement for sound optimization without visual obstructions, and it simultaneously provides a unifying visual canopy.;

The overall acoustic system is described as a distributed sound reinforcement system. It uses many innovative features as well as standard sound reinforcement techniques:;;;
*Musicians on stage are able to hear each other clearly in a way that facilitates ensemble play.
*Direct natural sound from the stage is reflected from architectural surfaces as well as being reinforced by two sound systems.
*Forward facing reinforcement speakers time the relaying of sound so as to make it seem to have arrived directly from the stage with clarity and proper volume levels.
*Distributed speakers allow for lower sound volumes than would be necessary with centralized speakers that would disturb the neighboring residences and business.

Specifically, the trellis system has unique features:;;
*Instead of merely reinforcing the sound like a traditional public address system, it seeks to replicate the acoustics of a concert hall.
**It creates a clearly defined concert space.
**Sound arriving directly from lateral sources masks city disturbances.
**Downward facing acoustic enhancement speakers simulate sound reflection similar to indoor concert hall wall and ceiling effects.

Events
The Jay Pritzker Pavilion hosts free music events, such as the Grant Park Music Festival and Gospel Fest, from spring through fall.; The Grant Park Symphony Orchestra performs in June, July and August.;''Frommer's Irreverent Guide to Chicago (sixth edition),'' 2007, p. 123, Wiley Publishing, Hoboken, NJ, ISBN 0-470-04079-3.; Other recently scheduled events include a concert by Wilco on September 12 2007 and the &quot;Poland for Chicago&quot; featuring Lech Kaczynski on September 25 2007.;;;; The pavilion also hosted a series of Jazz concerts from July 26-August 27 2007.;; On Saturday mornings in the summer the great lawn under the trellis system hosts various workouts such as yoga and pilates.;; Events in this outdoor park extend well beyond summer.;; The Pritzker Prize presentation ceremony, which moves to various architecturally significant international locations each year, was held in the Pritzker Pavilion in 2005.;;

=Grant Park Music Festival=
The Grant Park Music Festival, a Chicago tradition since 1931,;Tiebert, Laura, ''Frommer's Chicago with Kids'' (3rd edition), 2007, Wiley Publishing, Inc., ISBN 978-0470-12481-9, p.263.; remains the nation's only free, outdoor classical music series and features the Grammy-Nominated Grant Park Orchestra and Chorus.;; The 2007 performances were on Wednesday, Friday and Saturday from mid-June to mid-August.;;

Gallery

;
Image:Downtown Chicago Illinois Nov05 img 2698.jpg|The pavilion amid Grant Park, the South Side and the Historic Michigan Boulevard District
Image:Jay_Pritzker_Pavilion.jpg|view of skyline from rear of lawn
;

Notes





Category:2004 architecture
Category:Buildings and structures celebrating the third millennium
Category:Music venues in Chicago