
;
|| other_articles = ;;Features new to Windows XP;;;;Development of Windows XP;;
}}Windows XP is a line of operating systems developed by Microsoft for use on general-purpose computer systems, including home and business desktops, notebook computers, and media centers. The letters &quot;XP&quot; is an abbreviation for ''eXPerience''.;; It was codenamed &quot;Whistler&quot;, after Whistler, British Columbia, as many Microsoft employees skied at the Whistler-Blackcomb ski resort during its development. Windows XP is the successor to both Windows 2000 Professional and Windows Me, and is the first consumer-oriented operating system produced by Microsoft to be built on the Windows NT kernel and architecture. Windows XP was first released on October 25 2001, and over 400 million copies were in use in January 2006, according to an estimate in that month by an IDC analyst.;; It is succeeded by Windows Vista, which was released to volume license customers on November 8, 2006, and worldwide to the general public on January 30, 2007.

The most common editions of the operating system are Windows XP Home Edition, which is targeted at home users, and Windows XP Professional, which has additional features such as support for Windows Server domains and two physical processors, and is targeted at power users and business clients. Windows XP Media Center Edition has additional multimedia features enhancing the ability to record and watch TV shows, view DVD movies, and listen to music. Windows XP Tablet PC Edition is designed to run the ink-aware Tablet PC platform. Two separate 64-bit versions of Windows XP were also released, Windows XP 64-bit Edition for IA-64 (Itanium) processors and Windows XP Professional x64 Edition for x86-64.

Windows XP is known for its improved stability and efficiency over the 9x versions of Microsoft Windows. It presents a significantly redesigned graphical user interface, a change Microsoft promoted as more user-friendly than previous versions of Windows. New software management capabilities were introduced to avoid the &quot;DLL hell&quot; that plagued older consumer-oriented 9x versions of Windows. It is also the first version of Windows to use product activation to combat software piracy, a restriction that did not sit well with some users and privacy advocates. Windows XP has also been criticized by some users for security vulnerabilities, tight integration of applications such as Internet Explorer and Windows Media Player, and for aspects of its default user interface.

Windows XP had been in development since early 1999, when Microsoft started working on Windows Neptune, an operating system intended to be the &quot;Home Edition&quot; equivalent to Windows 2000 Professional. It was eventually merged into the Whistler project, which later became Windows XP.


Editions
{| border=&quot;0&quot; cellpadding=&quot;2&quot; cellspacing=&quot;0&quot; align=&quot;right&quot; style=&quot;margin-left:1em&quot;
|+;Original Windows XP cover boxes;
|-
| 150px || 150px
|-
|;;Home Edition;; || ;;Professional;;
|}
Diagram representing the main editions of Windows XP. It is based on the category of the edition (grey) and codebase (black arrow).
The two major editions are Windows XP Home Edition, designed for home users, and Windows XP Professional, designed for business and power-users. Other builds of Windows XP include those built for specialized hardware and limited-feature versions sold in Europe and select developing economies.

Windows XP Professional offers a number of features unavailable in the Home Edition, including:
* The ability to become part of a Windows Server domain, a group of computers that are remotely managed by one or more central servers.
* A sophisticated access control scheme that allows specific permissions on files to be granted to specific users under normal circumstances. However, users can use tools other than Windows Explorer (like cacls or File Manager), or restart to Safe Mode to modify access control lists.
* Remote Desktop server, which allows a PC to be operated by another Windows XP user over a local area network or the Internet.
* Offline Files and Folders, which allow the PC to automatically store a copy of files from another networked computer and work with them while disconnected from the network.
*Encrypting File System, which encrypts files stored on the computer's hard drive so they cannot be read by another user, even with physical access to the storage medium.
* Centralized administration features, including Group Policies, Automatic Software Installation and Maintenance, Roaming User Profiles, and Remote Installation Service (RIS).
* Internet Information Services (IIS), Microsoft's HTTP and FTP Server.
* Support for two physical central processing units (CPU). (Because the Multi-core (computing)|number of CPU cores and Hyper-threading capabilities on modern CPUs are considered to be part of a single physical processor, multicore CPUs are supported using XP Home Edition.);;;;
* Windows Management Instrumention Console (WMIC): WMIC is a command-line tool designed to ease WMI information retrieval about a system by using simple keywords (aliases).
=Windows XP for specialized hardware=
The main menu from Windows XP Media Center Edition 2005.
Microsoft has also customized Windows XP to suit different markets. Six different versions of Windows XP for specific hardware were designed, two of them specifically for 64-bit processors.

; Windows XP 64-bit Edition : This edition was designed specifically for Itanium-based workstations. This edition was discontinued in early 2005, after HP, the last distributor of Itanium-based workstations, stopped selling Itanium systems marketed as 'workstations'. However, Itanium support continues in the server editions of Windows.

; Windows XP Professional x64 Edition : Not to be confused with the aforementioned Itanium edition of Windows XP, this edition is derived from Windows Server 2003 and supports the x86-64 extension of the Intel IA-32 architecture. x86-64 is implemented by AMD as &quot;AMD64&quot;, found in AMD's Opteron and Athlon 64 chips, and implemented by Intel as &quot;Intel 64&quot; (formerly known as IA-32e and EM64T), found in Intel's Pentium 4 and later chips.

: Microsoft had previously supported other microprocessors with earlier versions of the Windows NT operating system line (including two 64-bit lines, the DEC Alpha and the MIPS R4000, although Windows NT used them as 32-bit processors). The files necessary for all of the architectures were included on the same installation CD and did not require the purchase of separate versions.

; Windows XP Media Center Edition : This edition is designed for media center PCs. Originally, it was only available bundled with one of these computers, and could not be purchased separately. In 2003 the Media Center Edition was updated as &quot;Windows XP Media Center Edition 2003&quot;, which added additional features such as FM radio tuning. Another update was released in 2004, and again in 2005, which was the first edition available for System Builders. Many of the features of Windows XP Media Center Edition 2005 (including screen dancers, auto playlist DJ, and high end visual screen savers) were taken from the Windows XP Plus! packages. These were originally shipped as add ons to Window XP to increase the users experience of their Windows XP machine.

Internet Explorer 6 running in Windows XP Tablet PC Edition.
; Windows XP Tablet PC Edition : Intended for specially designed notebook/laptop computers called tablet PCs, the Tablet PC Edition is compatible with a pen-sensitive screen, supporting handwritten notes and portrait-oriented screens. It cannot be purchased separately from a Tablet PC without an MSDN (Microsoft Developers Network) subscription.

; Windows XP Embedded : An edition for specific consumer electronics, set-top boxes, kiosks/ATMs, medical devices, arcade video games, point-of-sale terminals, and Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) components.

; Windows Fundamentals for Legacy PCs : In July 2006, Microsoft introduced a &quot;thin-client&quot; version of Windows XP called Windows Fundamentals for Legacy PCs, which targets older machines (as early as the original Pentium). It is only available to Software Assurance customers. It is intended for those who would like to upgrade to Windows XP to take advantage of its security and management capabilities, but can't afford to purchase new hardware.

=Windows XP Starter Edition=
Windows XP Starter Edition is a lower-cost version of Windows XP available in Thailand, Turkey, Malaysia, Indonesia, Russia, India, Colombia, Brazil, Argentina, Peru, Bolivia, Chile, Mexico, Ecuador, Uruguay and Venezuela. It is similar to Windows XP Home, but is limited to low-end hardware, can only run 3 programs at a time, and has some other features either removed or disabled by default.

According to a Microsoft press release, Windows XP Starter Edition is &quot;a low-cost introduction to the Microsoft Windows XP operating system designed for first-time desktop PC users in developing countries.&quot;

Specializations
The Starter Edition includes some special features for certain markets where consumers may not be computer literate. Not found in the Home Edition, these include localized help features for those who may not speak English, a country-specific computer wallpaper;; and screensavers, and other default settings designed for easier use than typical Windows XP installations.

In addition, the Starter Edition also has some unique limitations to prevent it from displacing more expensive versions of Windows XP.;; Only three applications can be run at once on the Starter Edition, and each application may open a maximum of three windows. The maximum screen resolution is1024×768, and there is no support for workgroup networking or domains. In addition, the Starter Edition is licensed only for low-end processors like Intel's Celeron or AMD's Duron and Sempron. There is also a 512&amp;nbsp;MB limit on main memory and a 120&amp;nbsp;GB disk size limit; (Microsoft has not made it clear, however, if this is for total disk space, per partition, or per disk). There are also fewer options for customizing the themes, desktop, and taskbar.

Market adoption
On October 9 2006, Microsoft announced;; that they reached a milestone of 1,000,000 units of Windows XP Starter Edition sold. In the mass market, however, the Starter Edition has not had much success. Many markets where it is available have seen the uptake of illegally cracked or pirated versions of the software instead.

=Windows XP Edition N=
In March 2004, the European Commission fined Microsoft €497 million (US$603 million) and ordered the company to provide a version of Windows without Windows Media Player. The Commission concluded that Microsoft &quot;broke European Union competition law by leveraging its near monopoly in the market for PC operating systems onto the markets for work group server operating systems and for media players&quot;. Microsoft is currently appealing the ruling.
In the meantime, a court-compliant version has been released. This version does not include the company's Windows Media Player but instead encourages users to pick and download their own media player. Microsoft wanted to call this version ''Reduced Media Edition'', but EU regulators objected and suggested the ''Edition N'' name, with the ''N'' signifying &quot;not with Media Player&quot; for both Home and Professional editions of Windows XP. Due to the fact that it is sold at the same price as the version with Windows Media Player included, Dell, Hewlett-Packard, Lenovo and Fujitsu Siemens have chosen not to stock the product. However, Dell did offer the operating system for a short time. Consumer interest has been low, with roughly 1,500 units shipped to OEMs, and no reported sales to consumers.;;;;;;;;

=Languages=
Windows XP is available in many languages.;http://download.microsoft.com/download/6/2/e/62e61f10-e106-4f4c-a862-63eec2b41efb/readme.htm; In addition, add-ons translating the user interface are also available for certain languages.;http://www.microsoft.com/industry/publicsector/government/locallanguage/find-a-language.aspx?regid=_all_;

New and updated features


Windows XP introduced several new features to the Windows line, including:
*Faster start-up and hibernation sequences
*The ability to discard a newer device driver in favour of the previous one (known as ''driver rollback''), should a driver upgrade not produce desirable results
*A new, arguably more user-friendly interface, including the framework for developing themes for the desktop environment
*''Fast user switching'', which allows a user to save the current state and open applications of their desktop and allow another user to log on without losing that information
*The ''ClearType'' font rendering mechanism, which is designed to improve text readability on Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) and similar monitors
*''Remote Desktop'' functionality, which allows users to connect to a computer running Windows XP from across a network or the Internet and access their applications, files, printers, and devices
*Support for most DSL modems and IEEE 802.11|wireless network connections, as well as networking over FireWire, and Bluetooth.

User interface
{| border=&quot;0&quot; cellpadding=&quot;2&quot; cellspacing=&quot;0&quot; align=&quot;right&quot; style=&quot;margin-left:1em&quot;
|+;Windows XP themes;
|-
|150px || 150px
|-
|;;Default Blue (Luna);; || ;;Windows Classic;;
|-
| 150px||;125px;
|-
|;;XP Royale;; ||;;The new start menu design;in the &quot;Royale&quot; theme.;;
|-
|}
The new &quot;task grouping&quot; feature introduced in Windows XP
Windows XP features a new task-based graphical user interface. The Start menu and search capability were redesigned and many visual effects were added, including:
*A translucent blue selection rectangle in Explorer
*Drop shadows for icon labels on the desktop
*Task-based sidebars in Explorer windows (&quot;common tasks&quot;)
*The ability to group the taskbar buttons of the windows of one application into one button
*The ability to lock the taskbar and other toolbars to prevent accidental changes
*The highlighting of recently added programs on the Start menu
*Shadows under menus (Windows 2000 had shadows under mouse pointers, but not menus)

Windows XP analyses the performance impact of visual effects and uses this to determine whether to enable them, so as to prevent the new functionality from consuming excessive additional processing overhead. Users can further customize these settings.;; Some effects, such as alpha blending (transparency and fading), are handled entirely by many newer video cards. However, if the video card is not capable of hardware alpha blending, performance can be substantially hurt and Microsoft recommends the feature should be turned off manually.;; Windows XP adds the ability for Windows to use &quot;Visual Styles&quot; to change the user interface. However, visual styles must be cryptographically signed by Microsoft to run. ''Luna'' is the name of the new visual style that ships with Windows XP, and is enabled by default for machines with more than 64&amp;nbsp;MiB of RAM. ''Luna'' refers only to one particular visual style, not to all of the new user interface features of Windows XP as a whole. In order to use unsigned visual styles, many users turn to software such as TGTSoft's StyleXP or Stardock's WindowBlinds. Some users &quot;patch&quot; the ;uxtheme.dll; file that restricts the ability to use visual styles, created by the general public or the user, on Windows XP.

The default wallpaper, Bliss, is a BMP photograph of a landscape in the Napa Valley outside Napa, California, with rolling green hills and a blue sky with stratocumulus and cirrus clouds.

The Windows 2000 &quot;classic&quot; interface can be used instead if preferred. Several third party utilities exist that provide hundreds of different visual styles. In addition, another Microsoft-created theme, called &quot;Royale&quot;, was included with Windows XP Media Center Edition, and was also released for other versions of Windows XP.

System requirements
Designed for Windows XP computer hardware logo
System requirements for Windows XP Home and Professional editions as follows:;;

;
{|class=&quot;wikitable&quot; cellpadding=&quot;3&quot; cellspacing=&quot;0&quot; style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;
|-
! style=&quot;width:120px;height:35px;&quot; |
! Minimum
! Recommended
|-
! Processor
| 233&amp;nbsp;MHz || 300&amp;nbsp;MHz or higher
|-
! Memory
| 64&amp;nbsp;MB RAM (may limit performance and some features) || 128&amp;nbsp;MB RAM or higher
|-
! Video adapter and monitor
| Super VGA (800 x 600) || Super VGA (800 x 600) or higher resolution
|-
! Hard drive disk free space
| 1.5&amp;nbsp;GB || 1.5&amp;nbsp;GB or higher
|-
! Drives
| CD-ROM || CD-ROM or better
|-
! Devices
|Keyboard and mouse || Keyboard and mouse
|-
! Others
| Sound card, speakers, and headphones || Sound card, speakers, and headphones
|-
|}
;

In addition to the Windows XP system requirements, Service Pack 2 requires an additional 1.8&amp;nbsp;GB; of free hard disk space during installation.;;

Service packs

Microsoft occasionally releases service packs for its Windows operating systems to fix problems and add features. Each service pack is a superset of all previous service packs and patches so that only the latest service pack needs to be installed, and also includes new revisions.;;Older patches need not be removed before application of the most recent one.

=Service Pack 1=
''Set Program Access and Defaults'' was added in Service Pack 1. Service Pack 1 (SP1) for Windows XP was released on September 9, 2002. It contains post-RTM security fixes and hot-fixes, compatibility updates, optional .NET Framework support, enabling technologies for new devices such as Tablet PCs, and a new Windows Messenger 4.7 version. The most notable new features were USB 2.0 support, and a ''Set Program Access and Defaults'' utility that aimed at hiding various middleware products. Users can control the default application for activities such as web browsing and instant messaging, as well as hide access to some of Microsoft's bundled programs. This utility was first brought into the older Windows 2000 operating system with its Service Pack 3.;; 

On February 3, 2003, Microsoft released Service Pack 1 (SP1) again as Service Pack 1a (SP1a). This release removed Microsoft's Java virtual machine as a result of a lawsuit with Sun Microsystems. ;;

=Service Pack 2=
Windows Security Center was added in Service Pack 2.
Service Pack 2 (SP2) (codenamed &quot;Springboard&quot;) was released on August 6, 2004 after several delays, with a special emphasis on security.;; Unlike the previous service packs, SP2 adds new functionality to Windows XP, including an enhanced firewall, improved Wi-Fi support, such as WPA encryption compatibility, with a wizard utility, a pop-up ad blocker for Internet Explorer, and Bluetooth support. Security enhancements include a major revision to the included firewall which was renamed to Windows Firewall and is enabled by default, advanced memory protection that takes advantage of the NX bit that is incorporated into newer processors to stop some forms of buffer overflow attacks, and removal of raw socket support (which supposedly limits the damage done by zombie machines). Additionally, security-related improvements were made to e-mail and web browsing. Windows XP Service Pack 2 includes the Windows Security Center, which provides a general overview of security on the system, including the state of anti-virus software, Windows Update, and the new Windows Firewall. Third-party anti-virus and firewall applications can interface with the new Security Center.;;

On August 10, 2007, Microsoft announced a minor update to Service Pack 2, called Service Pack 2c (SP2c).;; The update fixes the issue of the lowering number of available product keys for Windows XP. This update will be only available to system builders from their distributors in Windows XP Professional and Windows XP Professional N operating systems. SP2c was released in September 2007.;;

=Service Pack 3=

Windows XP Service Pack 3 (SP3) is currently in development. As of November 2007, Microsoft's web site indicates a &quot;preliminary&quot; release date to be in the first half of 2008.;;A feature set overview has been posted by Microsoft ;; and details new features available separately as standalone updates to Windows XP, as well as features backported from Windows Vista, such as black hole router detection, Network Access Protection and Windows Imaging Component.

Microsoft has begun a beta test of Service Pack 3.;; According to a file released with the official beta, and relayed onto the internet, there are a total of 1073 fixes in SP3.;;

This update to Windows allows it to be installed without a product key, and be run until the end of the mandatory 30-day activation period without one. The latest testing build of Service Pack 3 is the Release Candidate build, 3264. 

On December 4 2007, Microsoft released a release candidate of Service Pack 3 to both TechNet and MSDN Subscribers. On December 18, 2007, this version was made publicly available via Microsoft Download Center.;;

Support lifecycle
Support for Windows XP without a service pack (RTM) ended on September 30 2004;; and support for Windows XP Service Pack 1 and 1a ended on October 10 2006.;;;;

Mainstream support for Windows XP Service Pack 2 will end on April 14 2009, four years after its general availability.;;As per Microsoft's posted timetable, the company will stop licensing Windows XP to OEMs and terminate retail sales of the operating system June 30 2008, 17 months after the release of Windows Vista.;;

On April 14, 2009, Windows XP will begin its &quot;Extended Support&quot; period that will last for 5 years until April 8, 2014.;; 

Common criticisms


=Security issues=
Windows XP has been criticized for its susceptibility to malware, viruses, trojan horses, and worms. Security issues are compounded by the fact that users of the Home edition, by default, receive an administrator account that provides unrestricted access to the underpinnings of the system. If the administrator's account is broken into, there is no limit to the control that can be asserted over the compromised PC.

Windows, with its large market share, has historically been a tempting target for virus creators. Security holes are often invisible until they are exploited, making preemptive action difficult. Microsoft has stated that the release of patches to fix security holes is often what causes the spread of exploits against those very same holes, as crackers figured out what problems the patches fixed, and then launch attacks against unpatched systems. Microsoft recommends that all systems have automatic updates turned on to prevent a system from being attacked by an unpatched bug, but some business IT departments need to test updates before deployment across systems to predict compatibility issues with custom software and infrastructure. This deployment turn-around time also lengthens the time that systems are left unsecure in the event of a released software exploit.

=User interface and performance=
Critics have claimed that the default Windows XP user interface (Luna) adds visual clutter and wastes screen space while offering no new functionality and running more slowly – with some even calling it 'the Fisher-Price interface'. Users who do not like the new interface can easily switch back to the Windows Classic theme.;;

=Integration of operating system features=
In light of the United States v. Microsoft case which resulted in Microsoft being convicted for abusing its operating system monopoly to overwhelm competition in other markets, Windows XP has drawn fire for integrating user applications such as Windows Media Player and Windows Messenger into the operating system, as well as for its close ties to the Windows Live ID service.

=Backward compatibility=
Some users switching from Windows 9x to XP disliked its lack of DOS support. Although XP comes with the ability to run DOS programs in a virtual DOS machine along with the COMMAND.COM program from MS-DOS, XP still has trouble running many old DOS programs. This is largely due to the fact that it is NT-based and does not use DOS as a base OS.

=Product activation and verification=
Windows Genuine Advantage

A Windows Genuine Advantage notification indicating a failed validation.
While product activation and licensing servers are common for business and industrial software, Windows XP gave many casual computer users their first introduction to it, under the name &quot;Windows Genuine Advantage&quot; (WGA). The system was introduced by Microsoft to curb unauthorized distribution of Windows XP. Activation requires the computer or the user to activate with Microsoft within a certain amount of time in order to continue using the operating system. If the user's computer system ever changes &amp;mdash; for example, if two or more relevant components of the computer itself are upgraded &amp;mdash; Windows may refuse to run until the user reactivates with Microsoft.

WGA comprises two parts, an activation/verification system based in part upon the computer's hardware, and a user notification system. WGA for Windows was followed by verification systems for Internet Explorer 7, Windows Media Player 11, Windows Defender, and Microsoft Office 2007. Recently Microsoft removed the WGA verification from the installer for Internet Explorer 7 saying that the purpose of the change was to make IE7 available to all Windows users.;;;;

If the license key is judged not genuine, it displays a nag screen at regular intervals asking the user to buy a license from Microsoft.;; In addition, the user's access to Microsoft Update is restricted to critical security updates, and as such, new versions of enhancements and other Microsoft products will no longer be able to be downloaded or installed.

Common criticisms of WGA have included its description as a &quot;Critical Security Update&quot;, causing Automatic Updates to download it without user intervention, its behavior compared to spyware of &quot;phoning home&quot; to Microsoft every time the computer is connected to the Internet, the failure to inform end users what exactly WGA would do once installed (rectified by a 2006 update;;), the failure to provide a proper uninstallation method during beta testing (users were given manual removal instructions that did not work with the final build;), and its sensitivity to hardware changes which cause repeated need for reactivation in the hands of some developers.

Strictly speaking, neither the download nor the install of the Notifications is mandatory; the user can change their Automatic Update settings to allow them to choose what updates may be downloaded for installation. If the update is already downloaded, the user can choose not to accept the supplemental EULA provided for the Notifications. In both cases, the user can also request that the update not be presented again. Newer Critical Security Updates may still be installed with the update hidden. However this setting will only have effect on the existing version of Notifications, so it can appear again as a new version.

As of 2006, Microsoft is currently involved in a class action lawsuit brought forth in California, on grounds that it violated the spyware laws in the state with its Windows Genuine Advantage Notifications program.;;

Product key testing
In addition to activation, Windows XP service packs will refuse to install on Windows XP systems with product keys known to be widely used in unauthorized installations. These product keys are intended to be unique to each boxed (or bundled) copy of Windows XP and are included with the product documentation, but a number of product keys were posted on the Internet and were then used for a large number of unauthorized installations. The service packs contain a list of these keys and will not update copies of Windows XP that use them.

Microsoft developed a new key verification engine for Windows XP Service Pack 2 that could detect illicit keys, even those that had never been used before. After an outcry from security consultants who feared that denying security updates to illegal installations of Windows XP would have wide-ranging consequences even for legal owners, Microsoft elected to disable the new key verification engine. Service Pack 2 only checks for the same small list of commonly used keys as Service Pack 1. This means that while Service Pack 2 will not install on copies of Windows XP which use the older set of copied keys, those who use keys which have been posted more recently may be able to update their systems.

Currently Microsoft provides security updates to Windows XP without validating if it is legal. For all non-security updates, a user must have a verified copy of windows.

Protection 'cracking'
&quot;Key generator&quot; programs, commonly called &quot;keygens&quot;, exist to randomly generate Windows XP product keys (thus, there are no longer any commonly used keys to block) and then activate Windows without contacting Microsoft. These may or may not allow the user to receive updates although Microsoft has allowed major security updates to be downloaded and applied through Windows Update and its downloads site, even in pirated or non-genuine copies of Windows.;; In addition, a range of cracks and cracked versions of WGA exist, enabling a computer running a non-genuine copy of Windows to be detected as a genuine Windows system and access all appropriate Microsoft updates and enhancements.

License and media types
;
There are three main types of Windows XP licenses: Retail, &quot;VLK&quot;, and OEM.

Each type of license has a different installation CD. For customized or retail media, there is a very tiny difference on each type of disc that will only allow that installation disc to accept one type of product key.

Only retail and volume licenses include support for end-user installation scenarios from Microsoft. OEM software is pre-installed on systems and is supported by the system manufacturer rather than Microsoft. The price of such software is reduced to aid computer manufacturers in reducing costs of their computer system production. The cost of OEM software products bundled with systems is not disclosed by Microsoft or by its partners as each system manufacturer will define its own bundling price. Microsoft does not support OEM licenses because it cannot guarantee compatibility with every system configuration possible and it is the responsibility of each system manufacturer to ensure that its hardware is compatible.

Microsoft recommends that system manufacturers have their systems tested, for a fee, as part of the Windows Quality Online Services (Winqual) which includes extensive testing so that no component will cause instability in the Windows operating system due to incompatibility with the Windows operating system or with other system components or their respective drivers. Having a system tested and approved will allow the manufacturer to bear the &quot;Certified for Windows&quot; logo sticker on the exterior of the system, and there are additional benefits for having a tested product. This includes the product's being listed on the Windows Marketplace. Because of the fees and extensive requirements, Microsoft acknowledges that smaller system manufacturers may not opt in to the program until they produce computer systems at a modest rate and on recurring designs.

None of the Windows licenses can be used on multiple computers at once. Each computer must have its own license.
=Retail=
Retail licenses, those purchased from a retail store in full packaging, are of two sub-types: &quot;Upgrade&quot; and &quot;Full Purchase Product&quot;, often abbreviated by Microsoft as FPP. FPP licenses are transferable from one computer to another, provided the previous installation is removed from the old computer. Although upgrade licenses are also transferable, a user must have a previous version of Windows even on the new computer to which they are moving the installation.Retail licenses include installation support for end-users, provided directly by Microsoft.

=Volume Licenses=
Volume_license_key|Volume License Key (or &quot;VLK&quot;) is the nickname given to the versions sold to businesses under a Volume License Agreement with Microsoft, and are sold as upgrade licenses only, meaning that a previous license must be available for each new VLK license. The name &quot;Volume License Key&quot; refers to the ability to use one product key for multiple systems, depending on the type of agreement. Until recently, Microsoft had not required that every VLK license be activated. This led to leaked copies of VLK media and product keys from businesses for the use of piracy and quickly spread across the internet upon early release. Beginning with Windows XP Service Pack 1 (SP1), Microsoft's active attempts to search out and blacklist known pirated VLK product keys became well known due to the inability to install the service pack on a system with one of said keys. Later, this led into to the Windows Genuine Advantage (WGA) program. There are numerous Volume License Agreement programs, but most include direct support options provided by Microsoft. Additional program add-ons, such as Software Assurance, also provide extended support options beyond the typical free-period software lifecycle.

=Original Equipment Manufacturer licenses=
Original equipment manufacturer#Software|Original equipment manufacturer (OEM) licenses are pre-installed on, and sold with, pre-assembled computers from system manufacturers. There are two types of OEM product types: those used for &quot;Direct OEMs&quot; (major name brands that buy through a direct contract with Microsoft and produce and brand their own media from a Microsoft &quot;Gold Master Copy&quot; by using an Authorized Microsoft Duplication Partner), and those used for &quot;System Builders&quot; (local computer shops that buy generic, unbranded kits through Authorized Microsoft Distributors). Direct OEM product keys will often not activate with System Builder installation media because Direct OEMs are now required by Microsoft to pre-activate their copies in the factory using their own internal mechanism before delivery to the customer. It is recommended that System Builders also pre-activate their systems before delivery, but not required at this time. 

OEM installations can be customized using the Microsoft OEM Preinstallation Kit with branding, logos, additional applications, optional services, alternate applications for certain Windows components, Internet Explorer links, and various other customizations. All OEM customers must include support and contact information for the initial installation of Windows because it is the responsibility for the OEM to support the Windows installation, and is not provided by Microsoft to the end-user. Direct OEMs must create their own media, but have the option of creating their own custom recovery solution, which may or may not be similar to a generic installation. OEMs may provide a recovery partition on the hard drive as the custom recovery solution rather than providing disc-based media with the computer.

Some end-users have found this to be a troublesome option, because in the event of an out-of-warranty hard drive failure, they may not have access to reinstall Windows on a new hard drive. System Builders are not allowed the option to create a custom recovery CD/DVD media. The only deliverable media available for a System Builder to give to the end-user is the unbranded OEM System Builder hologram media kit. Because of this, when end-users reformat their hard drives and re-install from the installation media, they lose all the custom branding and support information that the System Builder would have included. 

As a supplemental recovery method to a CD/DVD-based installation, a System Builder may employ a fully customized recovery solution on the hard drive. Whether utilizing a recovery partition or not, a System Builder must still include the original generic OEM System Builder hologram CD/DVD media kit. OEM licenses are not transferable from one computer to another. Every computer sold/resold with an OEM license must include all of the original installation media or recovery solution, documentation, Certificate of Authenticity, and product key sticker with the sale. Microsoft requires that all OEM system manufacturers include as part of the configuration the Windows Out-of-Box Experience (OOBE), which is the initial setup wizard encountered the first time Windows boots-up. It is also required that Value-Added Resellers (VAR's), retailers, and general resellers not tamper with the OEM's customized OOBE mechanism unless under permission by the OEM, and it is a recommended configuration for systems that are privately resold so that a customer will have a like-new computer experience upon first boot-up. 

OEM licenses are to be installed by professional system manufacturers only. Under Microsoft's OEM License Agreement, they are not to be sold to end-users under any circumstance, and are to be pre-installed on a computer using the OEM Preinstallation Kit (OPK) before shipment to the customer, and must include at the very least the manufacturer's support contact information. They are therefore designed for installation only on a single computer and are not transferable, even if the original computer is no longer in use. This is not usually an issue for users who purchase new computer systems because most pre-assembled systems ship with a pre-installed operating system. There are few circumstances where Microsoft will allow the transfer of an OEM license from one non-functioning system to another, but the OEM System Builder License Agreement (SBLA), as well as the OEM End User License Agreement (EULA) do not contain any allowance for this, so it is entirely up to Microsoft's discretion, depending on the situation.;;

See also

* List of operating systems
* Comparison of operating systems
* History of operating systems
* Windows Firewall
* :Category:Windows XP typefaces|List of Windows XP's typefaces (fonts)

References


External links
* [http://www.microsoft.com/windowsxp/ Microsoft Windows XP home page]
* [http://www.microsoft.com/windows/using/windowsxp/ Using Windows XP operating system]
* [http://download.microsoft.com/download/1/6/6/16674679-1e6e-4304-a5a0-49eeaa31e639/RevGuide.pdf Microsoft Windows XP Reviewers Guide - August 2001 (PDF format)]



Category:2001 software
Category:Windows XP|*
Category:Windows NT
Category:Proprietary software
Category:Microsoft Windows

ar:ويندوز إكس بي
az:Windows XP
bn:উইন্ডোজ এক্সপি
zh-min-nan:Windows XP
bs:Microsoft Windows XP
bg:Windows XP
ca:Windows XP
cs:Windows XP
da:Windows XP
de:Microsoft Windows XP
el:Windows XP
es:Windows XP
fa:ویندوز اکس‌پی
fr:Microsoft Windows XP
gl:Windows XP
ko:윈도 XP
hr:Windows XP
it:Windows XP
lt:Windows XP
hu:Microsoft Windows XP
ms:Windows XP
nl:Windows XP
ja:Microsoft Windows XP
no:Windows XP
uz:Windows XP
pl:Microsoft Windows XP
pt:Windows XP
ro:Windows XP
ru:Windows XP
simple:Windows XP
sl:Windows XP
sr:Windows XP
fi:Windows XP
sv:Windows XP
tl:Windows XP
ta:வின்டோஸ் எக்ஸ்பி
th:วินโดวส์เอกซ์พี
vi:Windows XP
tr:Windows XP
yi:ווינדאס XP
zh-yue:Windows XP
zh:Windows XP