1937 sketch including Columbia River Highway (now U.S. Highway 30) as it passes west of Sauvie Island, northwest of Portland.
The Columbia River Highway (right) near Bonneville Dam.
Overcrossing at Shepperd's Dell.
Columbia River Gorge and Crown Point, seen from the Portland Women's Forum State Scenic Viewpoint (Chanticleer Point) along the Historic Columbia River Highway.

The Columbia River Highway is a highway built in the U.S. state of Oregon along the Columbia River between 1913 and 1922. When the Multnomah County portion was first paved in 1916, it was the first major paved highway in the Pacific Northwest. Once completed, it ran from Astoria to The Dalles, a total of 196 miles. It is an All-American Road.

The original highway was promoted by lawyer and entrepreneur Sam Hill and engineer Samuel Lancaster, to be modeled after the great scenic roads of Europe. From the very beginning, the roadway was envisioned not just as means of traveling by the then popular Model T, but designed with an elegance that took full advantage of all the natural beauty along the route.

When the United States highway system was officially established in 1926, the highway became the first and then westernmost segment of what became U.S. Route 30. Since then, modern Interstate 84 has been built parallel to the highway between Portland and The Dalles, replacing it as the main travel route and resulting in the loss of some of the original sections of road.

Today, the modern Columbia River Highway (Highway 2) uses I-84 from Portland to east of Boardman, and then U.S. Route 730 northeast to the Washington state line. There is also a Lower Columbia River Highway (Highway 2W, sometimes Highway 92), using U.S. 30 from Astoria to Portland. Between Troutdale and The Dalles, much of the original highway is part of the Historic Columbia River Highway (Highway 100.)

Present-day &quot;Historic Columbia River Highway&quot;
Modern highways, including I-84, and other developments have resulted in the abandonment of major sections of the historic original highway. In the interest of tourism and historical preservation, seventy-four miles of the original road—from Troutdale to The Dalles—have been established as the Historic Columbia River Highway (HCRH). Forty miles of the route are open to motor vehicles:
*The 24 westernmost miles starting in Troutdale (at the eastern edge of urban Portland) provide access to dozens of hiking trails, Crown Point Vista House, and numerous waterfalls such as Multnomah Falls. This section forms a loop with the Mount Hood Scenic Byway.
*The 16 easternmost miles ending in The Dalles.

The remaining portions of the HCRH designated for non-motorized use are now known as the Historic Columbia River Highway State Trail. These are being developed as money becomes available. Roughly seven miles between Hood River and Mosier have been open to non-motorized traffic since 2000, passing through the historic Mosier Tunnels.;;;;

Once restoration is complete, the highway will serve as a scenic and alternative bicycle route for I-84 and US-30 between The Dalles and Portland. Currently, cyclists wishing to travel between these two towns must ride on the shoulders of I-84 for much of the distance, or the much more dangerous and narrow State Route 14 on the Washington side of the river.

The Columbia River Highway is the nation's oldest scenic highway. In 1984 it was recognized as a List of historic civil engineering landmarks#United States landmarks|National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark by the American Society of Civil Engineers. In 2000 it was designated a National Historic Landmark by the National Park Service as &quot;an outstanding example of modern highway development&quot;.

See also
*Columbia River Gorge

References


Sources
* [http://arcweb.sos.state.or.us/50th/columbia/coulumiabackground.html 50th Anniversary Exhibit] of the [http://arcweb.sos.state.or.us/ Oregon State Archives]
* [http://www2.cr.nps.gov/hli/currents/columbia/ Heritage Preservation Services] of the National Park Service
* [http://tps.cr.nps.gov/nhl/detail.cfm?ResourceId=419295320&amp;ResourceType=District National Historic Landmark data sheet]

 ;

Category:Historic trails and roads in Oregon
Category:Landmarks in Oregon
Category:All-American Roads
Category:Columbia River Gorge
Category:U.S. Route 30
Category:National Historic Landmarks of Oregon
Category:Registered Historic Places in Oregon
Category:Named state highways in Oregon
Category:Interstate 84 (west)