 Cowley, Oxford, England, UK; Swindon, England, UK.
| production = 2001–present
| class= Supermini/Hot hatch
| body_style = 3-door Hatchback;2-door Convertible;5-door Estate
| engine = 
| transmission = 
| layout=FF layout
| predecessor= Mini;Rover 200;Austin Metro
}}

MINI is the name of a Cowley, England-based subsidiary of BMW as well as that of a car produced by that subsidiary since April 2001.

The car, designed by Frank Stephenson,;; is marketed as a &quot;retro&quot; redesign of the original Mini, which was manufactured by the British Motor Corporation and its successors from 1959 to 2000.The name is written in capital letters to distinguish it from its predecessor.;; Upon general release the car was marketed as &quot;NEW MINI&quot; although it is commonly less officially referred to as &quot;BMW Mini&quot;. Originally developed by Rover Group and to be sold under the Rover brand and made at the Longbridge plant, the MINI project was retained by BMW when the latter divested itself of Rover in 2000;;. The MINI is assembled in Cowley, Oxford, United Kingdom, in what was historically the Pressed Steel Company body plant,;; now known as Plant Oxford.

The 2001 to 2006 model years included four hatchback models: the basic &quot;MINI One&quot;, the diesel-engined &quot;MINI One/D&quot;, the sportier &quot;MINI Cooper&quot; and the supercharged &quot;MINI Cooper S&quot;.In 2005 a convertible roof option was added.In November 2006 a greatly re-engineered version of the MINI was released which is unofficially known as the &quot;Mk II MINI&quot;.;;. The Mk II is only available as a hard-top in the 2007 model year.

The MINI was designed and engineered to replace the long running Rover 100 and the larger Rover 200, both deemed unsuitable for the modern world automobile market. The MINI was supposed to replace low-end models of the 200 and high-end models of the 100 with a Rover 35 replacing high end 200s and low end 400s. After the divestment of MG Rover, the MINI was instead marketed as a small yet desirable city car rather than a mainstream replacement of the 100 and 200.

Models
= 2001 through 2006 - The Mk I MINI=

| length = 2002-03 Base: ;2004-06 Base &amp; Convertible: ;S Hatchback &amp; Convertible: 
| width = 
| height = 2002-03 Base: ;2002-03 S: ;2004-06 Base: ;2004-06 S: ;2004-06 Convertible: 
}}
Mk I MINI Cooper convertible
In Portugal and Greece, the MINI One is powered by a 1.4 litre version of the Tritec engine but all other petrol powered MINIs use the 1.6 litre version.;;;; Since 2004, a soft-top convertible option has been available across the entire range.;[http://www.mini.com/ Gateway to Official MINI websites worldwide];

There are numerous styling and badging differences between the models, perhaps the most obvious being that the Cooper S has a distinctive scoop cut into the bonnet. The Cooper S also has twin exhausts which exit under the center of the rear valance. The (non-S) Cooper has more chrome parts than the MINI One and has a single exhaust. The MINI One D has no visible exhaust pipes at all.;

In some markets, such as Australia and the US, only the MINI Cooper and Cooper S are sold because the MINI One's engine was considered to deliver insufficient power to run an air conditioner — a necessary feature in those climates. However, the only difference between the engines in the 'One' and the 'Cooper' models is a software change within the engine control unit which is tuned for optimum fuel economy on the MINI One and for a compromise between power and economy on the Cooper. Almost fifty percent of all MINIs sold in Australia and about seventy percent of those sold in the US are the top-of-the-range Cooper S model.

The names ''Cooper'' and ''Cooper S'' echo the names used for the sportier version of the classic Mini which in turn come from the involvement of John Cooper and the Cooper Car Company. The Cooper heritage is further emphasised with the ''John Cooper Works'' (JCW) range of tuning options that are available with the MINI. John Cooper also created a one-off racing model of the MINI One named the MINI One S Works. This car features many extras which help to improve performance, such as a racing exhaust and air filter as well as uprated suspension. The car also has one-of-a-kind 17-inch racing wheels.;;

2003 MINI Cooper S and Mk III classic Mini.
A 2006 MINI Cooper S Checkmate.
The &quot;Mk I&quot; MINI One, Cooper and Cooper S used a Brazilian-built Chrysler joint-venture engine, Tritec engine, while the MINI One D used a Toyota-built diesel engine. In August 2006, BMW announced that engines would in future be built in the UK, making the car essentially British-built again, with final assembly at Cowley and the body pressings being made in nearby Swindon at BMW's Swindon Pressings Ltd subsidiary.

While the modern MINI uses none of the engineering of the original Mini, it does capture much of the spirit of the classic car. Like the original, it uses a transversely-mounted four-cylinder engine driving the front wheels. All four wheels are pushed to the corners of the body which is a 'two-box' or 'hot hatch' design. The styling of the car, like that of the Volkswagen New Beetle, is a retro design that is deliberately reminiscent of the original Mini with contrasting roof colours, optional Go-faster stripes|bonnet stripes, optional rally lights and with black trim around the wheel arches and rocker panels that mimic the wide wheel flares found on many classic Minis.;

The MINI One and MINI Cooper were available with a continuously variable transmission or with a conventional GETRAG five-speed manual transmission. The Cooper S comes with a six-speed GETRAG manual or (from the 2005 model year onwards) a fully automatic transmission with paddle shifters.

As standard, the MINI had a 'drive by wire' electronic throttle, electronic brakeforce distribution, cornering brake control and electronic stability control (standard or optional, depending on model and region) to improve control and handling in adverse conditions.;;

Adding a supercharger to the 1st generation Cooper S model required that the battery be relocated into the rear of the car - leaving no room for a spare tyre. ; Hence this model comes with run flat tyres as standard.

= 2007 onwards - The Mk II MINI=

2008 Mini Cooper S Convertible
From November 2006, the hatchback MINI range has been replaced by an all-new MINI, consisting of MINI Cooper and MINI Cooper S models, powered by a new 1.6 litre engine co-developed by BMW and PSA Peugeot-Citroën. The &quot;old&quot; MINI Convertible continues to be sold alongside the new hatchback range. The Mk II MINI One will be on sale in April 2007 with Mk II Convertibles in the 2009 model year. The MINI One has a 1.4 litre engine derived from the same engine in the MINI Cooper and Peugeot 207.

The later &quot;Mk II&quot; MINI (or R56) uses the BMW-PSA 1.4/1.6 Prince 4 cylinder engine. The naturally-aspirated (non-turbo) versions of this engine use a system known as VALVETRONIC to control valves for optimum performance and/or efficiency. This MINI uses a drivetrain architecture based on that of the Peugeot 207 and the second generation Citroën C3. 

The R56 Cooper S boasts Gasoline_Direct_Injection|direct injection and a Twin Scroll Turbocharger featuring an Overboost function for added torque. This engine produces 128 kW (175 HP) and 240 N·m (177 ft·lbf) of torque. The Overboost function momentarily increases torque to 260 Nm (192 ft·lbf)

The new Cooper D model is available from April 2007, featuring a 1.6 litre, 16-valve turbodiesel engine producing 80 kW (110 HP) and 240 N·m (177 ft·lbf) of torque. This unit also features the Overboost function momentarily increases torque to 260 N·m (192 ft·lbf) 

Technical innovations include an electrically driven power steering system that avoids taking power directly from the engine, equal length driveshafts to eliminate torque steer, and a sophisticated multi-link suspension|multi-link rear suspension usually found only on rear wheel drive cars. The MINI has a 'drive by wire' electronic throttle, electronic brakeforce distribution, cornering brake control, and electronic stability control to improve control and handling in adverse conditions.;;

With the introduction of the R56 MINI, the CVT transmission has been dispensed with altogether, and replaced by an hydraulic automatic transmission unit, similar to that of the previous Cooper S. This gearbox is available throughout the whole range of R56 MINIs, appearing lastly on the Cooper D from 2008. Additionally, steering-wheel mounted paddle-shift is also available.

;

Convertible
A 2005 MINI Cooper S Convertible (Hot Orange/Black) and a 2003 MINI Cooper S (British Racing Green/White)
Mini Cooper S convertible, top-up
At the 'Salon International de l'Auto' (Geneva Motor Show) in 2004, MINI introduced a cabriolet (convertible) model which was released in the 2005 model year and available in One, Cooper and Cooper S versions.
The convertible roof is fully automatic - an unusual feature in such a small car - and can be opened partially to act as a sunroof whilst the car is driving at speed. The convertible model forsakes the rear hatch of the hardtop MINI - replacing it with a drop down 'tailgate' design reminiscent of the classic Mini and incorporating similarly prominent external hinges. The convertible also adds two small power windows for the rear seat passengers which are retracted automatically as the roof opens. The roof is made from a heavy cloth with many layers of insulation; the rear window is of glass and has a heater/defroster but no washer or wiper.

As a joke and undoubtedly as a part of MINI's viral marketing approach, purchasers of the MINI convertible were asked to sign a 'contract' promising that they would drive the car with the roof open at least 90% of the time. MINI also set up a telephone hotline (in the USA: 1-888-DO NOT CLOSE) which one may call to report convertible owners who are driving with the roof up inappropriately. The automated system offers such helpful advice as how to administer a wedgie to the offender.

At the 2007 North American International Auto Show, Mini introduced the limited edition of Mini Cooper S Sidewalk Convertible. It has a top speed of . 0-100 km/h only takes 7.9 seconds. It hasandof torque.

The Works GP MINI
The last version to be made with the Tritec engine is the MINI Cooper S with John Cooper Works GP Kit, a lightweight, race-prepped John Cooper Works model. Hand-finished by Bertone in Italy, it was produced as a limited-production run of 2000 cars in 2006, originally with 444 of those ear-marked for the UK market (although ultimately 459 were sold). The GP features more bolstered front seats but has no rear seats, which along with reduced sound-deadening, deleting the rear wash-wipe, offering optional air-conditioning and making other steps to reduce the overall weight, resulted in a weight saving of aroundover a Cooper S. Additionally, the car has enhanced braking and suspension, as well asfrom the John Cooper Works engine modification package. In place of the rear seats there is additional body stiffening and below-floor storage areas. There are many unique styling points such as the red door mirrors, a carbon fibre rear spoiler, unique body kit, bespoke (2 kg lighter) 4-spoke alloy wheels and specialised badging. Available in just one colour scheme, Thunder Blue with a Pure Silver roof, each car is individually numbered and features a decal on the roof along with a plaque on the dashboard. The last of the supercharged MINIs and a genuine Limited Edition model, it is expected that the MINI Cooper S with John Cooper Works GP Kit will become a collectors' item.

Success story
MINI owners were invited to bring their cars to the world premiere of ''The Italian Job''

The car has featured in many movies, most notable of which is the 2003 remake of ''The Italian Job''.

As with the classic Mini, the new MINI has a widespread club and enthusiast following and strong after-market support for performance upgrades and styling enhancements. Such community support keeps the brand highly valued and shows BMW's decision to relaunch the MINI as a successful business strategy. The MINI Cooper/Cooper S won the North American Car of the Year award for 2003.;;

Criticism
MINI paid for this Weekly World News story as a part of their advertising campaign for the MINI in 2003
Dr. Alex Moulton, designer of the suspension system for the original classic Mini, is reported to have said of the new MINI, in an interview with ''MiniWorld'' magazine, &quot;It's enormous - the original Mini was the best packaged car of all time - this is an example of how not to do it. it's huge on the outside and weighs the same as an Austin Maxi. The crash protection has been taken too far. I mean, what do you want, an armoured car? It is an irrelevance insofar as it has no part in the Mini story.&quot;;;

Many classic Mini enthusiasts are sharply critical of the new MINI (some call it ''the BINI'' as a contraction of ''BMW MINI''), citing the fact that it is two feet longer, a foot wider and almost twice the weight of the classic car - yet it has less rear leg room and less luggage space. Undoubtedly much of this is to do with modern crash protection requirements and the desire to incorporate features such as air conditioning, a supercharged engine with modern emissions controls and a higher level of front-seat comfort than the classic Mini was capable of. This opinion is far from universal and other classic Mini enthusiasts have embraced the modern MINI as a natural evolution of the original concept with many of them owning both kinds of car. 

Some MINI convertible owners criticise the poor rear visibility in the convertible. With the roof up the wide areas of cloth down the sides of the car block visibility to the rear quarters and the lack of washer/wiper on the small rear window - combined with the tendency of all flat-backed cars to accumulate dirt on the rear - effectively eliminates all rear visibility. Even with the roof down, the large roll-protection bars above the back seats and the bunched up cloth of the folded roof tends to block a significant fraction of rearward visibility. In an attempt to counter this problem when reversing the car, the MINI convertible comes with rear-mounted proximity sensors as standard equipment (these are available as an option on the hardtop MINI).

The MkII MINI

| length = HT: ;S: ;Convertible:;S Convertible: 
| width = Hatchback: ;Convertible:
| height = Hatchback: ;Convertible:
}}
MINI has introduced a new version of the car for the 2007 model year, on a re-engineered platform with many stylistic and engineering changes. The engine architecture is shared with PSA Peugeot Citroën and is intended to be more cost effective. The engineering was done in the United Kingdom by MINI/BMW Group UK Engineering, in Munich at BMW Group HQ and with external third parties including IDG in Italy.

The so-called 'Mk II MINI' (echoing the 'mark number' naming of the classic Mini) was introduced in November 2006 in the Cooper and Cooper S trim and the range will be completed later in 2007 with the arrival of the Mk II MINI One.For the first time, there will be a diesel-powered Cooper available from April 2007, badged as the Cooper D.The MINI convertible will continue to use the Mk I platform for at least a year. 

Though the Mk II has a familiar look, every panel on the new car has been changed from the old model. New safety requirements mean that the overall length has increased by , the front end raised and the indicators have been repositioned inside the headlights. The headlights themselves are now fixed to the front quarter panels rather than being housed within the bonnet so that they are not raised up with it when the bonnet opens. The car features a restyled grille and larger rear light clusters. The Cooper S retains the bonnet scoop in order to keep an association with the outgoing model — although the relocation of the intercooler to the front of the engine means that the scoop is now purely decorative. In addition, the Cooper S no longer has the battery located under the boot floor, instead being found in the more conventional place. The C pillars are no longer encased in glass and have been shaped to improve aerodynamics and to reduce the tendency for dirt to accumulate on the back of the car. Much criticised for the lack of rear legroom, MINI has added more space for rear passengers by creating sculpted cut-outs in the rear of the front seats. An engine starter button replaces the conventional ignition key and, with the optional 'convenience package', the car unlocks itself automatically when the key is brought close to the car.

The Cooper and Cooper S models offer a new rear axle and aluminium components to reduce the car's weight and a Sports kit option comprising harder springs, damper and anti-roll bars is offered with both variants. Another key difference is the introduction of an upgraded electric power steering system, the sharpness of which can be increased by pressing a Sport button in front of the shifter (both auto and manual) - which also adjusts the response of the accelerator. In conjunction with automatic transmission, the Sport Button also allows the engine to rev almost to the red line before changing gear.

As for engines, the Tritec engine has been replaced in the Cooper model with a 120 bhp 1.6-litre BMW/PSA Prince engine|Prince engine with BMW's Valvetronic infinitely variable valve timing, developed on and with Peugeot's core engine. It is reported in early road tests that this takes the car from 0-62 mph in a claimed 9.1 seconds and has top speed of . Fuel economy ofon the combined cycle is nearly 8 mpg better. The more powerfulCooper S replaces the supercharger with a new twin scroll turbocharger in the interests of efficiency, and will feature gasoline direct injection. Subsequently, this engine does not feature Valvetronic. This engine also has an &quot;overboost&quot; function which temporarily raises the torque by 15 ft·lbf (20 N·m) under hard acceleration. As a result, 0-62 mph is covered in a claimed 7.1 seconds, and top speed is . It achieves similar improvements in fuel economy to the Cooper, returningcombined. Both cars come with six-speed manual or automatic gearboxes. The turbocharged engine is the same (although with some French engineering modifications) as the one in the Peugeot 207 GTi/RC.

From 2008, all MINI models will be equipped with BMW Efficient Dynamics technology. This includes a start-stop feature shutting off the engine when the car is stationary.When the gas pedal is depressed the engine is restarted with electricity generated from Brake Energy Regeneration. The Cooper D model attainsand emits 104 g of carbon dioxide per kilometre. A MINI One D is a possibility in the future, possible attaining even better fuel efficiency and lower emissions of greenhouse gases than the Cooper D, which is itself quite comparable to the Toyota Prius for fuel economy and carbon dioxide emissions (potentially better than the Prius at higher rpm). Efficient Dynamics is standard in all MINI models, making MINI the first British car manufacturer to build a hybrid vehicle (although Efficient Dynamics is a Mild hybrid technology system) and also making it the first mainstream car manufacturer to have all models in its range as mild hybrids as standard (MINI's parent, BMW, is still in the process of implementing Efficient Dynamics across its older models).

All models of the Mk II with optional DSC (Dynamic Stability Control) also include &quot;Hill Assist&quot;, a feature which prevents the car from rolling backwards on an incline by holding the brakes on for 2 seconds after the driver lifts their foot from the brake pedal, allowing them time to engage the accelerator. 

The interior of the Mk II echoes the style of the earlier model but is in fact a complete redesign. The boot of the new car has an additional 10 litres of load space. Other changes in design - both visible and otherwise - have contributed to the MINI's recently awarded 5 stars in the EURONCAP tests. One example is the higher front bonnet, which now complies with the European pedestrian collision regulations.

The Mk II MINI is built by MINI's Production Triangle - Plant Swindon (body panels), Plant Hams Hall (engine) and finally Plant Oxford, where final assembly work is completed.;[http://paultan.org/archives/2006/10/16/mini-production-triangle-and-oxford-plant-tour/ &quot;MINI Production Triangle and Oxford Plant Tour&quot;], Paultan.org, October 16 2006;

MINI Clubman
MINI Cooper S Clubman at the Internationale Automobil-Ausstellung 2007
;
The MINI Clubman is a separate model now available to order in Cooper, Cooper D, and Cooper S variations. It is several inches longer to accommodate more leg room and a larger boot. It has double doors as a boot instead of a pull-up hatch. It also features a Club Door on the right side for passengers in the back.

The name 'Clubman' is a break with classic Mini tradition.The classic Mini Clubman was a saloon car with a squarer front end but a standard Mini rear end.The estate van versions of the classic Mini were called 'Mini Traveller' and 'Mini Countryman'. However, these names are not fully understood in world markets and BMW did not purchase the rights to use those names when they bought the rights to the other Mini names.

The Clubman recently received heavy criticism on motoring show Top Gear where it was dubbed as the ugliest car for the Top Gear awards of 2007, as well as nominated for worst overall car, only for the G-Wiz to subsequently receive this award.

Prototype and concept cars
MINI Traveller concept car at the 2006 Detroit Auto Show
MINI Traveller rear view
Rover first showed the MINI as the ACV30 concept car in 1997;. This looked very different from the production MINI. It had circular headlamps, huge wheel flares and a much more rounded appearance overall compared to the production design.

Before the first sales of the MINI, prototype versions were shown at the 2000 Paris Auto Show. These were essentially identical to the version that was finally sold except that the colours used ('Candy Blue' and 'Flamenco Orange') have never been used in production cars.

BMW demonstrated a hydrogen-powered internal combustion technology in some of their concept cars in 2000 and 2001, and MINI showcased a hydrogen powered concept car in 2001 at the Frankfurt Auto Show. The car differs from electric-motor hydrogen concepts, such as the Honda FCX in that it uses a cylinder-based internal combustion engine.

An all-electric MINI is in use at the British Embassy in Mexico that uses aroundof Lithium Ion batteries. Three electric MINIs were also made for use in some subway scenes in the 2003 movie ''The Italian Job'' to satisfy the subway authorities concerns over possible carbon monoxide poisoning. PML Flightlink developed a prototype series-hybrid conversion, called &quot;MINI QED&quot;, replacing the drivetrain with anelectric motor in each wheel and an efficient onboard gasoline generator.;http://www.pmlflightlink.com/archive/news_mini.html;

With higher powered engines, the standard front wheel drive MINI tends to produce a high level of wheel spin - a four wheel drive would be a natural solution to that problem. GETRAG demonstrated a four wheel drive version of the MINI in 2004.

At the Frankfurt Motor Show in 2005, MINI revealed a retro version of the classic 'Mini Traveller' station wagon. Based on a stretched wheelbase with two side-hinged rear doors and separate rear seats replacing the split bench seat of the standard MINI. At the Tokyo Auto Show, the same basic concept reappeared with some fanciful additions - a circular roof section could be removed to form a picnic table with four folding chairs. The rear side windows were replaced with fold-down storage containers containing cutlery, cups and plates. In Detroit, a further version was presented without the table and chairs - but with a radically restyled interior.

Additional MINI models, including a four-door version, a two-seat roadster and a dune buggy have been shown as computer-graphic mock-ups at various times.

=Beer Can Exhaust=
The team of designers working on the 2001 MINI had finished the full-sized clay mock-up of the MINI in plenty of time for a presentation for the board of directors. Chief designer Frank Stephenson realized that the model did not have an exhaust pipe.His short-term solution was to pick up an empty beer can, punch a hole in it, strip off the paint and pushed it into the clay at the back of the car, which took just a few minutes.The overall design for the mock-up was so good that the board members told him not to change a thing, resulting in the distinctive exhaust tip seen in production cars.;

Internal designations
All MINI models have R-series model numbers assigned to them. These are a legacy of the MINI's original development within Rover Group. The following designations are known:;;

*R50: &quot;Mk I&quot; MINI One and Cooper 
*R52: &quot;Mk I&quot; MINI Convertible
*R53: &quot;Mk I&quot; MINI Cooper S
*R55: MINI Clubman;;
*R56: &quot;Mk II&quot; MINI One, Cooper, S and D
*R57: &quot;Mk II&quot; MINI Convertible
*R58: Possible future four-wheel drive MINI

Popularity
The MINI was an instant hit with buyers in Britain and most other markets when it was launched over the summer of 2001. It has sold in far higher volumes than the old Mini did in its final few years of production from Longbridge , and with anticipated production of ca. 250,000 per annum from 2008 on in Cowley, Oxford Mini is now starting to rival the sales success that it enjoyed during the end of the 1960s and early 1970s. It has managed 40,000+ sales in the UK for most of the years that it has been on sale, and has never been far outside the Top 10.The second largest market is now the USA.

The Mini One has found popularity among buyers who want a stylish and enjoyable but economical vehicle, while the Cooper and Cooper S versions make up the bulk of the sales, and are among the most popular hot hatchbacks on the British market, proving to be at least a match for the likes of the Citroen C2 VTR, Ford Fiesta ST, Peugeot 206 GTI and the sporty versions of the Renault Clio.

Racing
A MINI Cooper participating in an autocross event
A new racing version of the MINI based on the R56 Cooper S.Called the ''MINI John Cooper Works CHALLENGE'' has been built and will be raced in the 2008 MINI Challenge. ([http://www.minichallenge.co.uk/index.php?option=com_content&amp;task=view&amp;id=106&amp;Itemid=9 More Information])

The MINI is currently in use in the Koni_Challenge|KONI Challenge Series and the [http://www.minichallenge.co.uk/ MINI Challenge].

See also

* The Classic Mini

References


External links
*[http://www.mini.com Official international MINI website]
*[http://www.realoem.com Real OEM], Provides part numbers and diagrams for MINI OEM parts
;




Category:Car manufacturers
Category:BMW vehicles|MINI
Category:Subcompact cars
Category:Front wheel drive vehicles
Category:Hatchbacks
Category:Convertibles
Category:Motor vehicle manufacturers of the United Kingdom
Category:Oxford
Category:Retro style automobiles
Category:2000s automobiles
Category:2001 introductions
Category:Economy of Oxfordshire

bg:Мини (BMW)
ca:Mini (BMW)
de:New Mini
ja:MINI (BMW)
pt:MINI (BMW)
ro:MINI (BMW)
ru:MINI (BMW)
fi:MINI (BMW)
sv:BMW Mini