

Princess Azula is a fictional character voiced by Grey DeLisle in the Nickelodeon animated television series ''Avatar: The Last Airbender.'' Azula is a gifted Firebender and highly favored crown princess of the Fire Nation, initially bent on retrieving her exiled brother, Prince Zuko, and delivering him to their father, List of Avatar: The Last Airbender major secondary characters#Fire Lord Ozai|Fire Lord Ozai. She is accompanied on her search by her childhood Azula#Allies|friends, List of Avatar: The Last Airbender major secondary characters#Mai|Mai and List of Avatar: The Last Airbender major secondary characters#Ty Lee|Ty Lee.

Azula is the first female Firebender to appear in the series, and is the Firebender silhouetted in the opening credits of each episode.

History
Azula's cruelty was evident even as a child.
Azula was born to Prince Ozai and Princess Ursa around two years after her brother, Zuko. As such, she is the descendant of both Fire Lord Sozin (from Ozai) and Avatar Roku (from Princess Ursa).;; She is named for her grandfather, Ozai's father, List of Avatar: The Last Airbender minor book 2 characters#Fire Lord Azulon|Fire Lord Azulon. Azula grew up in the riches, splendor, and privileges of being royalty in the Fire Nation. Even when she was only eight years old, Azula expressed her natural talents, along with her tendency for malice and perfectionism. Her sharp wits and the prodigy she displayed towards Firebending gained her much attention and acclaim and made her Ozai's favorite child. Her father began raising her as his true heir early on, taking her into his confidence and grooming her in politics while ignoring Zuko. Azula can now also bend blue fire and lighting (since blue fire is much more deadly than red) From the quality of her Fire Nation#Azula’s Ship|ship and soldiers, her favored status was readily apparent.

She had no desire to waste time playing around like a regular girl. She was much more interested in power, suggesting that her father would make a better Fire Lord than the heir apparent, her Uncle Iroh, whom she also dubbed &quot;a quitter and a loser&quot; for abandoning his siege at Ba Sing Se.;; No love developed between her and Zuko throughout the next few years—when he was burned by their father in an Agni Kai, she watched with a savage triumph.;;

Story

= Book 1: Water=
Character Preview
Azula on the episode &quot;The Storm (Avatar: The Last Airbender)|The Storm.&quot;
During one of Iroh's flashbacks in &quot;The Storm (Avatar: The Last Airbender)|The Storm,&quot; Azula can briefly be seen within the audience observing the Fire Nation#Agni Kai|Agni Kai in which Prince Zuko receives his facial scar from his father. As Iroh narrates, he looks away when his nephew is burned, but at Iroh's side are Admiral Zhao, then a Captain, and a then-unknown girl, both of whom look on eagerly.;; Online speculation on who she was erupted as soon as the episode aired, and her identity was revealed a month later at the 2005 San Diego Comic Con. Originally set to be at the age of fifteen and entitled &quot;Zula&quot;, the character was revealed to be Prince Zuko's younger sister.;http://www.asmzine.com/features/conventions/sdcc05/;

Azula makes a full, albeit cameo, appearance at the end of the season one finale, The Siege of the North. She is shown kneeling before her father, Fire Lord Ozai, who, after commenting that Zuko is a failure and Iroh is a traitor, charges her with a mission.;;

= Book 2: Earth=
Family Reunion

When Fire Lord Ozai branded Iroh a traitor and her brother Zuko a failure, she obeyed her father's command for her to go and capture them, as seen in the final seconds of the first season finale. Azula attempted to capture the two by luring Zuko with the false promise of being accepted as guests when they would have really been taken in as prisoners.;;When Zuko learned of the deception, he attacked her, but she easily manages to evade his every blow, taunting him all the way. However, she failed to finish her brother off, as Iroh redirected her lethal lightning attack away from Zuko and into a cliff face, and then kicked her off the edge of the ship.;; 

Counseled by her twin masters List of Avatar: The Last Airbender minor book 2 characters#Lo and Li|Lo and Li that the royal procession was not a wise choice to accompany her on her mission, she decided to abandon the unit, opting to find and recruit her childhood friends.;; List of Avatar: The Last Airbender major secondary characters#Ty Lee|Ty Lee required some &quot;convincing,&quot; but List of Avatar: The Last Airbender major secondary characters#Mai|Mai was only too willing to leave the boredom of the conquered city of Earth Kingdom#Omashu|Omashu in favor of going on an exciting hunt—especially if it involved Zuko. While there, Azula renamed Omashu to the city of New Ozai. 

A New Target

During this episode, Azula first encountered the Avatar. She and her new allies were almost able to defeat Aang and his friends, but their lack of preparation as well as a trump card delivered by a shrewd King Bumi enabled the three kids to escape. Soon after the battle, she named the Avatar as a personal target in addition to her brother.

In &quot;The Chase (Avatar: The Last Airbender)|The Chase,&quot; Princess Azula and her two friends relentlessly pursued the Avatar's group, using a Fire Nation tank train and List of Avatar: The Last Airbender creatures#Mongoose Dragon|Mongoose Dragons as mounts ;http://www.nick.com/all_nick/tv_supersites/avatar2/; to pursue them night and day. After wearing down the group, the three decided to split up when Aang tried to lead Azula's group away from Sokka and Katara's trail. Azula sent Ty Lee and Mai to follow Sokka and Katara, while she continued chasing down the Avatar. Azula encountered the Avatar in an abandoned town and prepared to fight but was interrupted by her brother Zuko, who had tracked them and had his own plans for capturing Aang. Azula managed to fend off both of their attacks and land a knockout blow on Zuko and trap Aang beneath some fallen rubble. Katara, Sokka and Toph showed up to rescue Aang, while Iroh arrived to help Zuko. Cornered, she claimed to surrender, saying that &quot;a princess surrenders with honor&quot;. But Azula took advantage of Iroh's momentary distraction and seriously wounded him with a bolt of blue fire, then disappeared as the four benders attacked with their respective elements.

Azula was not seen again until &quot;The Drill&quot; where she, along with her allies Mai and Ty Lee, were overseeing War Minister Qin's efforts to use a Fire Nation#The Drill|giant drill to break through the outer wall of Ba Sing Se. When the engineers reported an accident involving an ambushed engineer, stolen drill schematics, and further sabotage, Azula recognized that it was the work of the Avatar. She found Aang, Katara, and Sokka attempting to break the engine's braces. Aang and his gang fled. She sent Mai and Ty Lee after Katara and Sokka while Azula followed Aang. She caught Aang trying to bore a hole at the top of the drill, and they engaged in a brutal match. Her Firebending nearly overwhelmed the young Avatar, after both were knocked off the drill by a blast of slurry, Azula was only able to climb too late as Aang's impact on an earthen wedge destroyed the drill and knocked Azula away.

Fall of Ba Sing Se

Azula, Mai and Ty Lee are seen again in &quot;Appa's Lost Days,&quot; tracking down Aang's bison, Appa, not realizing he had been separated from Aang and his friends. He was in a forest clearing being tended to by the Earth Kingdom#Kyoshi Island Warriors|Kyoshi Warriors, a band of elite female warriors. Azula and her friends initiated a battle with the warriors, and to protect Appa, the Kyoshi Warriors drive Appa away to escape while they distracted Azula Mai and Ty Lee. The result of the battle remains unseen, but it is apparent that the Kyoshi Warriors did not claim victory, at the conclusion of &quot;The Earth King,&quot; the three girls are seen in stolen Kyoshi outfits and makeup, impersonating the warriors.

The Earth King, believing the girls to be Kyoshi warriors, reveals to them the treachery of the Dai Li led by Long Feng and Sokka's plan to invade the Fire Nation on the day of a solar eclipse. Additionally, by speaking of the Dai Li, the Earth King hands her an vital tool for enacting a plan to take down his city from the inside. Feigning ignorance of spying Dai Li agents, Azula and her friends plant knowledge of their affiliation with the Fire Nation and were taken to the imprisoned Long Feng as they are still loyal to him. He gave her control of the Dai Li to overthrow the government in exchange for the Avatar.;;

Upon discovering that Zuko and Iroh were in the city, Katara quickly approached Azula, believing her to be List of Avatar: The Last Airbender major secondary characters#Suki|Suki, with the news. She realizes too late who they truly are and is swiftly dispatched by Ty Lee. Azula locked Katara in the Ba Sing Se#Crystal Catacombs of Old Ba Sing Se|crystal catacombs beneath the city and sent a letter to Iroh and Zuko, telling them that the Earth King wished for them to serve him tea.;; The pair soon fell into her trap, and were surrounded by Dai Li agents. Iroh managed to escape the palace but Zuko chose to stay and face Azula. He was quickly overwhelmed by the Dai Li and imprisoned in the same dungeon as Katara.

Azula threatening to kill the Earth King.
Azula then proceeded to unleash her coup on the city, having the Dai Li arrest the Earth Kingdom#Council of five|Council of Five, the Earth King's highest ranking generals, while she captured the Earth King. Sokka and Toph were arrested as well while attempting to warn the Earth King of the danger, and Azula sent them off to a metal prison cell, but the group managed to escape since Toph knew how to Metalbend out of the prison but the Earth King said that he was not going to leave without his pet bear Bosco. Entering back to the Earth King's throne, they first attack Ty Lee but she got stuck after Toph Earthbended her, but Mai didn't want to fight and told &quot;just take the bear&quot; since it was belonged to the Earth King. Before Toph, Sokka, and the Earth King escaped from the metal prison, Long Feng arrived with the Dai Li agents and commanded the Dai Li to arrest Azula, proclaiming a double cross. Azula explained that the Dai Li no longer knew whom to follow. She denounced him for his lack of divine right to rule. She then commanded Long Feng to bow to her. He grudgingly obliged, saying that she had beaten him at his own game. She scathingly replied that he was &quot;never even a player.&quot; 

Later on, Azula chased Aang and Katara in the crystal catacombs and engaged in battle. She was joined by Zuko, who chose to fight alongside Azula and the two overwhelmed Aang and Katara separately. Aang cleared all of his chakras and induced an avatar state. While in the Avatar State, Azula struck him from behind with lightning (during the Avatar State). Katara gathered Aang (after the lighting strike) in her arms and managed and escape with the help of Iroh who defended and attacked both the Dai Li, Zuko, and Azula. Afterwards, Iroh was promptly arrested by Dai Li, and Azula was left in control of Ba Sing Se.;;

= Book 3: Fire=
Returning Home

In &quot;Going Home Again,&quot; a canonical interlude comic featured within the second All-''Avatar'' Nickelodeon Magazine#Nickelodeon Magazine Presents|Nick Mag Presents edition, Azula is shown making arrangements for their return to Fire Nation. One of which is passing her position as ruler of Ba Sing Se over to List of Avatar: The Last Airbender minor book 2 characters#Joo Dee|Joo Dee, whom she views as the ''perfect'' person to govern in her stead, dubbing the former tour guide Supreme Bureaucratic Administrator. Azula refuses to take no for an answer when Zuko chooses to remain in Ba Sing Se. Gathering Ty Lee, the princess schemes to use Mai and Zuko's mutual childhood crushes to entice her brother's decision. With the false report of a meeting with a Admiral Liang, she sets the two up on a Fire Nation dinner date, with Dai Li agents serving as waiters. However, Zuko overhears Azula and Ty Lee giggling in the nearby bushes. The princess attempts to catch herself, claiming that she was just telling Ty Lee to stop messing around in the bushes. Neither Zuko nor Mai buys into the tale and leave off on a private walk around Ba Sing Se.

The following day, while boarding the ships, Azula looks on at Zuko and Mai speaking affectionately with one another and concludes that her plan seems to have been successful after all. She turns to her chained uncle and wonders aloud if the prisoner will even survive the trip home. As she bids her brother farewell, Zuko suddenly makes the resolve to come with them back to the Fire Nation.

Upon returning home, Azula and Zuko are welcomed with open arms by the people with a rally held in their honor to praise their successful efforts at the Earth Kingdom capital. Later Azula and Zuko converse about Zuko's long-awaited meeting with their father. When Zuko meets his father, it is revealed that Azula misinformed Ozai that he was the one who killed the Avatar. When confronted, Azula claims that she saw how worried Zuko was about not having the Avatar and decided to give him credit for his demise out of a generous gesture to repay his aid in the takeover of Ba Sing Se. Zuko, in disbelief accuses her of having an ulterior motive. Azula points out how letting him have all the glory over slaying the Avatar could do little to benefit her, but acknowledges the fact that should it be discovered that the Avatar was indeed alive, all that glory would swiftly turn into shame and foolishness.;;

Later on, after interrupting a picnic between him and Mai, Azula easily manages to trick Zuko into admitting that he had been making visits to Iroh's cell. Azula seemingly expresses concern for her brother, warning him that if others were to discover that he and Iroh were meeting, it would be assumed that they were plotting together.
Azula, Ty Lee, Mai, and Zuko stand together.
In &quot;The Beach (Avatar: The Last Airbender)|The Beach,&quot; Azula, Mai, Ty Lee, and Zuko travel to Fire Nation#Ember Island|Ember Island for a vacation while the Fire Lord privately confers with his advisors. Azula takes advantage of this opportunity to experience life as a normal person, choosing to keep her and Zuko's identity a secret. At a party the group attended, Azula confides in Ty Lee that she is jealous of how popular Ty Lee is with boys. She takes advice that Ty Lee gives her on attracting attention, but quickly reverts to her usual persona, scaring away possible suitors. Later, Azula plays the role of interpreter as Ty Lee, Mai and Zuko take turns telling stories of their personal inner turmoil. When her turn comes, Azula states she doesn't have a sob story. But does softly admit that she was aware that her mother loved Zuko more and thought she was a monster, but callously adds that her mother was right. As a testament of their special day, Azula leads the others into trashing the host's home.

The Day of Black Sun

A few minutes after the beginning of the solar eclipse, as Aang, Toph, and Sokka manage to locate and burst into the Fire Lord's underground bunker, they are confounded to instead find Azula. She reveals that she's known about the invasion for months (she found this out when the Earth King told them, believing them to be The Warriors of Kyoshi) and is fully prepared to face and delay the attackers. Azula has two Dai Li agents she brought back from Ba Sing Se attack the trio while she runs away, closely pursued by Aang, Sokka and Toph. Once the agents have been defeated and Azula is cornered, Sokka realizes that she's merely wasting their time and that they should just forget her in favor of searching for Ozai. As they start to leave, Azula mentions Suki to Sokka, stating that she gave up hope on him ever rescuing her from her imprisonment. This revelation promptly makes Sokka charge at her in blind rage. Azula pulls out a shuriken, but Toph senses it and pins her to the wall. Sokka furiously demands to know where Suki is while Azula simply remains silent. When the eclipse ends, Azula breaks her restraints and coyly informs the trio of Ozai's precise location before running down the hall. As the invasion draws to a close, the princess is shown observing the Avatar and his friends escape aboard Appa from her Fire Nation#Air force|airship. However, she chooses not give pursuit, knowing that sooner or later, they'll be back.;; During Azula's confrontation with the group, Zuko confronts his father, Ozai, and tells him that Azula lied to him by saying that Zuko killed the Avatar, when in reality Azula struck down the Avatar and managed to survive in the end. In addition to this, Azula did not attempt to kill the Avatar when he and his friends attacked the capital. What Ozai did or plans on doing to his daughter remains to be seen.

Personality
A dedicated nationalist with a superiority complex, Azula relentlessly drills herself towards perfection and will settle for nothing less from herself or those that serve her. Even as a child she was seen to react with hostility when outdone. She is rather vain and believes that power and domination are what makes a person strong. 

She is also known for being one of the cruelest characters in the series. From a very young age, Azula demonstrated sadistic aggression and lack of remorse, which suggest that Azula could be a sociopath—her own mother, Princess Ursa even remarked; &quot;''What is wrong with that child?''&quot; and her uncle Iroh once referred to her as &quot;''crazy''&quot;. If Azula is indeed a sociopath then it probably stems from her father's parenting methods--who knows what she may have seen while she was under his wing.

In &quot;Zuko Alone&quot;, her first reaction when hearing of Iroh's son Lu Ten's death in battle is to wonder whether this now makes her father the heir to the throne. In a similarly cold-blooded comment, when hearing that Iroh is ending his two year siege of Ba Sing Se due to grief over his son's death, she dismisses him as a &quot;''loser and a quitter''&quot;. This cruel and seemingly total lack of compassion extends to all of her family, with the exclusion of her mother. She grins maliciously when Zuko is burned and scarred by their father, and eagerly watched to see how her father would be punished by her grandfather in &quot;Zuko Alone&quot;. She also did not seem to care when her mother disappeared or when her grandfather died, instead only appreciating her father's dishonorable gall in stealing Iroh's birthright to the throne.
But in recent events it would seem that Ozai, by raising her hold little value in family ties, in his attempts to mold her into his perfect heir, he had never thought that she would ever go behind his back as she lies and minipulates even him--in ''The Awakening'' she lies to him, telling him that Zuko had struck down the Avatar when it was her but she did not know for sure if whenever the Avatar had survived.

Her cruelty is apparently infamous and extreme; when Iroh accidentally ingests the poisonous White Jade flower in &quot;The Cave of Two Lovers, Zuko and Iroh decide that they would rather go seek help from the Earth Kingdom and face certain death than deal with the Fire Nation and be handed over to Azula. 

Azula's characteristic blue flames symbolizes the power she possesses and constantly seeks to increase. Her apathy also accounts for her ability to create and direct lightning, the &quot;cold-blooded fire;&quot; according to Iroh, the skill requires complete control of all emotion, which would not prove difficult for Azula with her one-track mentality. Despite all of this, she is an excellent tactician, regularly displaying perception and resourcefulness that allows her to take advantage of almost any situation. 

Ironically, for all her refinement and self-confidence, Azula does retain some unsureness. As a result of her sequestered life of royalty, Azula has come to develop a considerable amount of social ineptitude, particularly in her uncertainty of how to act around boys. Her over-competitive nature surfaces during a Kuai ball game, and she later admits her jealously over how much attention Ty Lee receives from boys. 

=The Blue Dragon=
In &quot;The Earth King,&quot; Zuko fell into a deep sleep and dreamed of himself as Fire Lord, counseled by two dragons. Grey DeLisle, the voice of Azula, voiced the blue dragon on the right of Zuko, while the red dragon trying to advise him had the voice of their uncle Iroh. Coincidentally, their ancestors Avatar Roku and Fire Lord Sozin owned a red dragon and blue dragon, respectively.;; The apparent symbolic meaning is the conflict within Zuko between the side of Azula and Sozin (evil) and that of Iroh and Roku (good).

Abilities
Azula's advanced Firebending.
Azula is revealed to be proficient in the highly difficult technique of creating and guiding lightning, a sub-skill of Firebending, and was the first character within the show to demonstrate its creation.

The second most noticeable feature of Princess Azula's bending is her ability to create characteristic Firebending#Blue fire|blue flames, which are much more intense than the red, orange and yellow fire normally used by Firebenders. In &quot;Return to Omashu&quot; Azula was seen using flames in previously unseen ways, such as jets of flames, whirling disks, and blades of fire. Also notable is her high amount of chi and stamina shown in her ability to produce a greater amount of flames than most Firebenders without tiring, as she is shown to be able to maintain successive assaults for long durations of time. She has also demonstrated the skill to condense her flames, enabling her fire to cut clean through various objects. When formed into fireballs, the flames serve to be rather concussive, able to firmly pulverize objects such as stone. Azula can also &quot;curve&quot; her fireballs for greater range during combat. Azula is able to generate powerful shields of swirling flames which withstood the full force of four simultaneous elemental attacks. She is even able to charge up her fire before releasing it, as was seen during her fight with Aang in &quot;The Drill.&quot; The depth of Azula's potential came to a head in &quot;The Crossroads of Destiny,&quot; where after using numerous Firebending skills she is shown using her flames to propel herself forward almost similar to a jet and minutes later be able to shoot lightning.

Her prodigious skills in hand to hand combat is displayed several times during the series, most prominently in &quot;The Avatar State&quot;, &quot;Appa's Lost Days&quot;, and &quot;The Day of Black Sun&quot;.She easily avoided Zuko's frenzied knife attacks without the use of Firebending, guiding his hands off course.Later, she proceeded to disarm Suki, and knocked her to her feet without bending.Finally, she nimbly avoided all of Aang and Toph's elemental attacks during a solar eclipse, displaying incredible acrobatic prowess. Azula is basically, a master at parkour.
Most probably the most powerful Firebender seen in the series so far (with the possible exception of her own father, Fire Lord Ozai), Azula's Firebending prowess and prodigious skill allow her to fend of many attackers with little effort, and, as is seen in The Crossroads of Destiny, defeat a single talented bender, like Aang.

She is also a skilled actress, which she uses often to deceive or trick the enemy, seen especially in &quot;The Crossroads of Destiny&quot;, when she pretended to be afraid of Long Feng when purposely captured by the Dai Li. She has great self control, and is said to be &quot;terrifying and inspirational&quot; at the same time. In &quot;The Day of Black Sun&quot;, she further demonstrates it with her ability to lie without having Toph sense it, implying a lack of any physical reaction (which, in real life, is often seen as a sign of sociopathy) ;; It is due to her fighting prowess, mastery of Firebending, conniving mind, and her pursuit of absolute perfection that Azula managed to conquer Ba Sing Se where everyone else had failed.

Allies
Image:Azula+Friends.png|thumb|left|250px|Azula and her allies: List of Avatar: The Last Airbender major secondary characters#Mai|Mai and List of Avatar: The Last Airbender major secondary characters#Ty Lee|Ty Lee.
As of the season two episode &quot;Return to Omashu,&quot; Princess Azula is traveling with her old friends List of Avatar: The Last Airbender major secondary characters#Ty Lee|Ty Lee and List of Avatar: The Last Airbender major secondary characters#Mai|Mai in search of Zuko and Iroh, who were now proclaimed to be traitors by her father, Fire Lord Ozai. They also seek to find and capture the Avatar. While Ty Lee did not want to join Azula on her mission, Azula's methods of persuasion (by ordering the circus ringmaster to make Ty Lee's performance in &quot;Return to Omashu&quot; increasingly more dangerous) were enough to change her mind. Mai, however, was more than willing to join Azula in her mission, claiming that her lifestyle in Omashu (now New Ozai) was deathly boring and needed a change. Recently, in &quot;The Crossroads of Destiny,&quot; Zuko and the Dai Li join forces with Azula and assisted her in her coup against the Earth King.


Family
= Fire Lord Ozai=
Explicitly stated by Zuko, Azula is favored by their father, Fire Lord Ozai; Azula's cruelty and sadism is only matched by her father's. As Firebending prodigy and the favored sibling, everyone adored her and, judging by her ship and soldiers, she was given the better treatment. In the final seconds of the season one finale, Fire Lord Ozai gave her the task of capturing Zuko and Iroh.In the first episode of the third season, Azula demonstrates her lack of loyalty to even her own father; she is willing to lie, even to him, for her own ends. However, during the events of &quot;The Day of Black Sun&quot;, Zuko reveals Azula's lies to their father and he is clearly outraged to learn that Azula failed to truly kill the Avatar. It is not yet known what this revelation means for Azula.

= Princess Ursa=
:''&quot;My own mother thought I was a monster...she was right of course, but it still hurt.&quot; ---Azula''

Little has been revealed of the relationship between Azula and her mother, Ursa, granddaughter of Avatar Roku. It is known that she cared deeply for the neglected Zuko, despite her daughter Princess Azula having better Firebending powers. This is a direct contrast to her husband Ozai's feelings towards his children, who has stated that while Azula was &quot;born lucky&quot;, Zuko was &quot;lucky to be born.&quot; It is also seen that Azula was often scolded by Ursa for the unkind and disrespectful remarks she made about her brother, uncle, or grandfather.

In &quot;Zuko Alone,&quot; Azula tells Zuko that his father was going to have to kill him after angering the then Fire Lord Azulon. Ursa, however, apparently does &quot;vicious, treasonous&quot; things that night in order to save Zuko, resulting in Azulon's death and her banishment. It is noted, however, that Azula seems to show no concern or sadness at all over either of these events, especially when it becomes known that Ozai will be crowned Fire Lord; like her father Ozai, family seems to be pale in comparison to her desire for power.

In &quot;The Beach (Avatar: The Last Airbender)|The Beach&quot;, when her turn comes to share a revelation of her life, Azula remarks that she was well aware Ursa loved Zuko more, but unlike her brother doesn't obsess over it. She does however reveal how it hurt that her own mother thought she was a monster, albeit halfheartedly, as she goes on to state it was true.

=Prince Zuko=
Zuko, a.k.a. Zuzu (the nickname which Azula had called him) is Azula's older brother, but there is no love between the two. Even though she is the younger sibling, Azula has been known to lie to Zuko and take pleasure in torturing him; though Zuko knew that &quot;Azula always lies&quot; (as he repeatedly says in &quot;Zuko Alone&quot;), she was often able to manipulate him. This is most notable in &quot;The Crossroads of Destiny,&quot; when she uses his hope of redemption to make him betray Iroh and join her in attacking the Avatar and conquering Ba Sing Se. It seems as if the two didn't always harbor hatred towards each other. As children they got along much better than as teenagers, but this may have only been because of the presence of their mother and/or uncle. 

However, following their alliance, Azula's relationship with her brother gradually begins to take a drastic change. She express concern over Zuko after discovering that he had been secretly visiting an imprisoned Iroh visits, warning him that if it were to be discovered that he was meeting with their uncle, it could be misinterpreted as conspiracy. During their vacation to Ember Island, Azula shares nostalgia and depression with her brother as they pay visit to their family's decrepit summer beach-house. Along with Mai and Ty Lee, Azula later on helps Zuko realize why he is still so angry, assuming the role of interpreter as they each share revelations of their life experiences that shaped them into who they are. When her turn comes, Azula admits that she is well aware that their mother loved Zuko more, but unlike her brother, doesn't feel the need to care or spend her time complaining about it. Although, with each act of compassion towards her brother, Azula ensures to couple it with her usual coldheartedness, a performance reminiscent to that of a love hate relationship. Azula condescendingly instructs Zuko to be more careful in regards to Iroh, ending her warning with the use of his old nickname of &quot;dum-dum&quot; for effect. When Zuko finally brings himself to confide his feelings of uncertainty and confusion towards Azula, she impulsively deems him pathetic.

During the events of &quot;The Day of Black Sun&quot;, Zuko confesses to their father Ozai that it was Azula who struck Aang at Ba Sing Se, but she failed to kill him and gave the credit to Zuko to avoid punishment.

= Iroh=
Like Zuko, Iroh cares little for Azula. Even as a child, Azula had a considerably low opinion of her uncle; she referred to him as &quot;His Royal Tea-loving Kookiness&quot;, promptly torched a doll he had sent her from an Earth Kingdom city and called Iroh a &quot;quitter and loser&quot; for losing heart and failing to capture Ba Sing Se after the death of his son Lu Ten. She also expressed excitement at the idea that he might die in battle, which would put Ozai in line for the throne. Once, in &quot;The Chase (Avatar: The Last Airbender)|The Chase,&quot; she attacked Iroh with a fire blast---after she had, as she put it, &quot;surrendered with honor&quot;---and severely wounded him. Unlike Zuko, Iroh is not blinded by emotion and can see through Azula's lies. Despite Iroh's tendencies to avoid unnecessary conflict, he goes as far as teaching Zuko more difficult bending techniques in order to help him defeat her. Iroh is one of the few other characters who has been shown with the ability to create lightning,;; and has demonstrated the technique of redirecting lightning, of which Azula has no knowledge. Azula also acknowledges him as her &quot;Old Fuddy-Duddy Uncle&quot;. In &quot;The Crossroads of Destiny,&quot; while Azula was trying to manipulate Zuko into taking over Ba Sing Se, Iroh was trying to convince him to let go of trying to restore his honor and &quot;choose good&quot;. 

= Lu Ten=
Not much is known about Azula's relationship with Iroh's son, her cousin Lu Ten. When, in &quot;Zuko Alone,&quot; Ursa informs her children that &quot;Iroh has lost his son. Your cousin, Lu Ten, did not survive the battle&quot;, Zuko is shown to be very shocked and sad by the news, while Azula is shown in the background with an unclear expression.Her feelings about Lu Ten, both before and after his passing, remain a mystery.

= Avatar Roku=
Though it is never verbally stated, Azula is the great-granddaughter of Roku, by virtue of the fact that her brother is the great-grandson. She apparently is unaware of this heritage. Oddly enough, her brother suffers from a great internal conflict because of the fact that their ancestors were the previous incarnation of The Avatar and the Fire Lord who betrayed him. Azula however, is apparently not affected by the conflict, despite having the same ancestry as her brother. Azula does share more personality traits with her heartless ruthless father than Zuko does, which would explain why she doesn't express the same inner turmoil as her brother, if she endures it at all.

Relationships
= Aang=
Aang, as the Avatar, has become Azula's target along with her brother and uncle. In their first encounters, she nearly defeats him, normally forcing him to flee. However, he proves that, with newly learned bending skills, he can stand against her. On top of The Drill outside Ba Sing Se, Aang defeats her in battle with a little help from Momo though the victory was hard fought. 

In The Crossroads of Destiny, she attempts to take on Aang and Katara on her own but is clearly outmatched. Zuko however, quickly shows up and aids her in battle. After a long furious battle, and being outnumbered with the arrival of the Dai Li, Aang attempts to go into the Avatar State, but is shot with lightning and mortally wounded by Azula before he can complete the transformation.

Azula and a resurrected Aang meet again on The Day of Black Sun in a secret underground bunker. Powerless because of the eclipse, Azula's main focus is distracting Aang from his task of deposing her father, rather than fighting him.

= Zuko=
Although her brother Azula doesn't think much of Zuko. In The Avatar State she lies to Zuko saying their father regreted the banishment and when he and Iroh boarded the ship the captain accidentally revealed they were prisoners and after a short fight she almost kills him with lightning until Iroh redirected it. Later she marks them as traitors and says &quot;Whoever harbors these traitors will feel the wraith of the fire lord.&quot;

In Zuko Alone she tricks Zuko into falling on Mai in a pond laughing saying they were cute. Later after Zuko ran from Ozai and Azulon's conversation Azula tells him that their father is going to kill Zuko so Ozai may feel the pain of losing a first born, which is found out later as the truth.

In The Crossroads of Destiny Azula asks Zuko for his help after having Dai Li agents trap Iroh. She says that if he helps then their father will welcome him back with honor and love, She also says that Zuko is many things but he is not a traitor. Later while Azula fights Aang and Katara, Zuko appears at first it looks like he is helping the Avatar but he quickly proves that wrong by attacking Aang. While Azula has her arms and legs trapped by Katara, Zuko sets her free, proving for a short while he means to help Azula.

= Mai=
Mai seems to regard Azula as a friend; however, Azula treats Mai with as little concern as with she does with Ty Lee. Throughout their childhood, Azula was known for trickery, such as causing her brother Zuko to fall with Mai into the water in order to laugh at them.

In an interesting note, Mai does not necessarily fear Azula, as shown in the episode &quot;The Drill,&quot; where Mai refused an order from Azula to chase Sokka and Katara in the drill's waste system (&quot;She can shoot all the lightning she wants at me - I am ''not'' going in that wall sludge juice&quot;). In another occasion, she also allows Sokka, Toph and the Earth King free to escape with the king's pet bear Bosco in &quot;The Crossroads of Destiny&quot;, either due to the fact she didn't feel like fighting them or that she didn't want to deal with Bosco anymore. However, these incidents have occurred in the absence of Azula; it is not known how Mai would have acted if she was around. It seems that Mai might be hesitant to defy the princess outright, but still has given Azula dark looks when the princess's back was turned, and it is possible the two may eventually come to conflict.

=Ty Lee=
Like Mai, Ty Lee regards Azula as a friend and even openly displays admiration for her, but ever since they were both children, she hasn't treated Ty Lee as such. Because Azula cannot stand to be &quot;number two&quot;, even as a child, she shoved Ty Lee to the ground when she could do acrobatic flips that Azula couldn't. Azula also bullied an unwilling Ty Lee into joining her search for the Avatar, her brother, and uncle while she was doing a performance, forcing the ringmaster to set fire to the net underneath her and releasing the most dangerous animals. In &quot;The Beach (Avatar: The Last Airbender)|The Beach&quot;, she laughs when Zuko calls Ty Lee a &quot;circus freak&quot;.Despite this, Azula has been known to be occasionally respectful and somewhat caring toward Ty Lee.When she makes Ty Lee cry by telling her that no boy cares for her as a person, she apologizes quickly and even admits that it was her own insecurity that shaped that comment.

References
 
;




Category:Avatar: The Last Airbender characters
Category:Fictional princesses
Category:Fictional women in war

da:Azula
es:Azula
pt:Princesa Azula