
''A Beautiful Mind'' is a 2001 American biographical film about John Forbes Nash, the Nobel Laureate (Economics) mathematician. The film was directed by Ron Howard and written by Akiva Goldsman. It was inspired by a bestselling, Pulitzer Prize-nominated 1998 book of the same name by Sylvia Nasar. The film stars Russell Crowe, along with Jennifer Connelly, Ed Harris and Paul Bettany.

The story begins in the early years of Nash's life at Princeton University as he develops his &quot;original idea&quot; that will revolutionize the world of mathematics. Later, Nash develops schizophrenia and endures paranoid and delusional episodes while painfully watching the loss and burden his condition brings on his wife and friends.

The film opened in US cinemas on December 21, 2001. It was well received by critics, and went on to win four Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Supporting Actress. It was also nominated for Best Leading Actor, Best Editing, Best Makeup, and Best Score. The film has been criticized for its inaccurate portrayal of some aspects of Nash's life.

Production
Producer Brian Grazer first read an excerpt of Sylvia Nasar's book ''A Beautiful Mind'' in Vanity Fair magazine. Grazer immediately purchased the rights to the film.; ''A Beautiful Mind'' DVD featurette ''A Beautiful Partnership: Ron Howard and Brian Grazer'', [2002]; He eventually brought the project to Ron Howard, who had scheduling conflicts and was forced to pass. Grazer later said that many A-list directors were calling with their point of view on the project. He eventually focused on a particular director, who coincidentally was only available at the same time Howard was available. Grazer was forced to make a decision and chose Howard.; ''A Beautiful Mind'' DVD featurette ''A Beautiful Partnership: Ron Howard and Brian Grazer'', [2002]; 
From left to right: Director Ron Howard, actor Russell Crowe, producer Brian Grazer, and screenwriter Akiva Goldsman.
Grazer then met with a number of screenwriters, mostly consisting of &quot;serious dramatists&quot;, but he chose Akiva Goldsman instead, because of his strong passion and desire for the project. Goldsman's creative take on the project was to not allow the viewers to understand that they are viewing an alternate reality until a specific point in the film. This was done to rob the viewers of their feelings in the same way that Nash himself was. Howard agreed to direct the film based only on the first draft. He then requested that Goldsman accentuate the love story aspect.; ''A Beautiful Mind'' DVD featurette ''Development of the Screenplay'', [2002]; 

Dave Bayer, a Barnard College Professor of Mathematics, was consulted on the mathematical equations that appear in the film. Bayer later stated that he approached his consulting role as an actor when preparing equations, such as when Nash is forced to teach a Calculus class, and arbitrarily places a complicated problem on the blackboard. Bayer focused on a character who did not want to teach ordinary details and was more concerned with what was interesting. Bayer received a cameo role in the film as a professor that lays his pen down for Nash in the pen ceremony near the end of the film.;;

Greg Cannom was chosen to create the makeup effects for ''A Beautiful Mind'', specifically the age progression of the characters. Russell Crowe had previously worked with Cannom on ''The Insider''. Howard had also worked with Cannom on ''Cocoon''. Each character's stages of makeup were broken down by the number of years that would pass between levels. Cannom stressed subtlety between the stages, but worked toward the ultimate stage of &quot;Older Nash&quot;. It was originally decided that the makeup department would merely age Russell Crowe throughout the film. However, at Crowe's request, the makeup purposefully pulled Crowe's look towards the facial features of the real John Nash. Cannom developed a new silicone-type makeup that could simulate real skin and be utilized for overlapping applications, shortening the application time from eight hours to four hours. Crowe was also fitted with a number of dentures to give him a slight overbite throughout the film.; ''A Beautiful Mind'' DVD featurette ''The Process of Age Progression'', [2002];

Howard and Grazer chose frequent collaborator James Horner to score the film because of familiarity and his ability to communicate. Howard said, regarding Horner &quot;It's like having a conversation with a writer or an actor or another director.&quot; A running discussion between the director and the composer was the concept of high level mathematics being less about numbers and solutions, and more akin to a kaleidoscope, in that the ideas evolve and change. After the first screening of the film, Horner told Howard &quot;I see changes occurring like fast moving weather systems.&quot; He chose it as another theme to connect to Nash's ever changing character. Horner chose pop singer Charlotte Church to sing the soprano vocals after deciding that he needed a balance between a child and adult singing voice. He wanted a &quot;purity, clarity and brightness of an instrument&quot; but also a vibrato to maintain the humanity of the voice.; ''A Beautiful Mind'' DVD featurette ''Scoring the Film'', [2002];

The film was shot 90% chronologically.; ''A Beautiful Mind'' DVD commentary featuring Ron Howard, [2002]; Three separate trips were made to the Princeton University campus. During filming, Howard decided that Nash's delusions should always first be introduced audibly and then visually. This not only provides a visual clue, but establishes the delusions from Nash's point of view. The real John Nash's delusions were also only auditory. A technique was also developed to visualize Nash's epiphanies. After speaking to a number of mathematicians who described it as &quot;the smoke clearing&quot;, &quot;flashes of light&quot; and &quot;everything coming together&quot;, the filmmakers decided upon a flash of light appearing over an object or person to signify Nash's creativity at work.; ''A Beautiful Mind'' DVD commentary featuring Ron Howard, [2002];

Plot
The film opens with John Nash arriving as a new graduate student at Princeton University. He is a recipient of the prestigious Carnegie Prize for mathematics. He meets his roommate Charles, a literature student, who soon becomes his best friend. He also meets a group of other promising math and science graduate students, Martin Hansen, Sol, and Bender, with whom he strikes up an awkward friendship. Nash admits to Charles that he is better with numbers than people, and that he strives for a truly original idea for his thesis paper. He is largely unsuccessful with the women at the local bar. However, the experience is what ultimately inspires his fruitful work in the concept of governing dynamics, a theory in mathematical economics. After the conclusion of Nash's studies as a student at Princeton, he accepts a prestigious appointment at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), along with his friends Sol and Bender. 
Russell Crowe as John Nash. 
Five years later while teaching a class on Calculus, he meets Alicia, a student with whom he falls in love and eventually marries. While at Princeton, Nash runs into his former roommate Charles and meets Charles' young niece Marcee. He also encounters a mysterious Department of Defense agent, William Parcher. Nash is invited to a United States Department of Defense facility in The Pentagon to crack a complex encryption of an enemy telecommunication. Nash is able to decipher the code mentally. Parcher observes Nash's performance from above, while partially concealed behind a screen. Parcher later encourages Nash to look for patterns in magazines and newspapers, ostensibly to thwart a Soviet plot. After being chased by the Russians and an exchange of gunfire, Nash becomes increasingly paranoid and begins to behave erratically.

After observing this erratic behavior, Alicia informs a psychiatric hospital. Later, while giving a lecture, Nash realizes that he is being watched by a hostile group of people. Although he attempts to flee, he is forcibly sedated and sent to a psychiatric facility. Nash's internment seemingly confirms his belief that the Soviets were trying to extract information from him, and that being taken by the officials of a psychiatric facility was a kidnapping by Soviet agents. Alicia, desperate to help her husband, visits a drop-box and retrieves the never-opened &quot;top secret&quot; documents that Nash had delivered there. When confronted with this evidence, Nash is finally convinced that he has been hallucinating. The Department of Defense agent William Parcher and Nash's secret assignment to decode Soviet messages was in fact all a delusion. Even more surprisingly, Nash's friend Charles and his niece Marcee are also only products of Nash's mind.

After a painful series of insulin shock therapy sessions, Nash is released on the condition that he agrees to take antipsychotic medication. However, the drugs create negative side-effects that affect his relationship with his wife and, most dramatically, his intellect. Frustrated, Nash secretly stops taking his medication, triggering a relapse of his psychosis. While bathing his infant son, Nash becomes distracted and wanders off. Alicia barely manages to save their child from drowning. When she confronts Nash, he claims that his friend Charles was watching their son. Alicia runs to the phone to call the psychiatric hospital for emergency assistance. Charles, Marcee, and Parcher all appear to John and urge him to kill his wife rather than allow her to lock him up again. After Alicia flees the house in terror, Nash steps in front of her car to prevent her from leaving.After a moment, Nash states &quot;She never gets old&quot; as he observes that Marcee is the same age that she was when he first met her several years before. Only then does he accept that all three of these people are, in fact, part of his psychosis.

Caught between the intellectual paralysis of the antipsychotic drugs and his delusions, Nash and his wife decide to try to live with his abnormal condition schizophrenia. Nash attempts to ignore his hallucinations and not feed &quot;his demons&quot;. Nash is growing older while working on his studies in the library of Princeton University. He still suffers hallucinations and periodically has to check if new people he meets are real, mentions taking newer medications, but is ultimately able to live with and largely ignore his psychotic experiences. Nash approaches his old friend and intellectual rival Martin Hansen, now head of the Princeton mathematics department, and receives permission to work out of the library and audit classes. He eventually begins teaching again. He is honored by his fellow professors for his achievement in mathematics, and goes on to win the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics for his revolutionary work on game theory. Later, Nash and Alicia are about to leave the auditorium in Stockholm, when John sees Charles, Marcee and Parcher standing and smiling. Alicia asks John &quot;What's wrong?&quot; John replies &quot;Nothing.&quot; With that, they both leave the auditorium.

Cast
*Russell Crowe as John Forbes Nash. A mathematical genius who is obsessed with finding an original idea to ensure his legacy. There was difficulty when casting Crowe, who was well-liked by the producers, when he went to film ''Gladiator'' in a different time-zone and was difficult to reach for an extended period of time to attach him to the project.; ''A Beautiful Mind'' DVD featurette ''Casting Russell Crowe and Jennifer Connelly'', [2002];
*Jennifer Connelly as Alicia Nash. A later student of Nash who catches his interest. Connelly was cast after Ron Howard drew comparisons to her and Alicia Nash, both academically and in facial features.; ''A Beautiful Mind'' DVD featurette ''Casting Russell Crowe and Jennifer Connelly'', [2002];
*Paul Bettany as Charles Herman. Nash's roommate and best friend throughout graduate college. The character of Charles was not written to be British. However, director Brian Helgeland provided a tape of Bettany from ''A Knight's Tale''. The filmmakers agreed that the character could be British, based on Bettany's performance in the film.; ''A Beautiful Mind'' DVD commentary featuring Ron Howard, [2002];
*Ed Harris as William Parcher. A government agent for the Department of Defense. He enlists Nash to help fight Soviet spies.
*Josh Lucas as Martin Hansen. Nash's rival from his graduate school years at Princeton.
*Adam Goldberg as Sol. A friend of Nash's from Princeton University who is chosen, along with Bender, to work with him at MIT.
*Anthony Rapp as Bender. A friend of Nash's from Princeton University who is chosen, along with Sol, to work with him at MIT.
*Vivien Cardone as Marcee. Charles' niece.
*Christopher Plummer as Dr. Rosen. Nash's doctor at a psychiatric hospital.
*Judd Hirsch as Helinger. The head of the Princeton mathematics department.

Release
''A Beautiful Mind'' received a limited release on December 21, 2001, receiving positive reviews. It was later released nationally on January 4, 2002. Rotten Tomatoes showed a 76% approval rating among critics with a movie consensus stating &quot;The well-acted ''A Beautiful Mind'' is both a moving love story and a revealing look at mental illness.&quot;;; Roger Ebert gave the film four stars (his highest rating) in his Chicago Sun-Times review and, along with co-host Richard Roeper on the television show ''At the Movies with Ebert &amp; Roeper|Ebert &amp; Roeper'', gave the film a &quot;thumbs up&quot; rating. Roeper also stated &quot;this is one of the very best films of the year.&quot; ;; Mike Clark of USA Today gave three and a half out of four stars and also praised Crowe's performance and referred to as a welcomed follow up to Howard's previous film ''The Grinch''.;; However, Desson Thomson of the Washington Post found the film to be &quot;One of those formulaically rendered Important Subject movies&quot;,;; and Charles Taylor of Salon Magazine gave the film a scathing review, calling Crowe's performance &quot;the biggest load of hooey to stink up the screen this year.&quot;;; The mathematics in the film were well praised by the mathematics community, including the real John Nash.;;

Also in 2002, the film was awarded four Oscars for Adapted Screenplay (Akiva Goldsman), Best Picture (Brian Grazer and Ron Howard), Directing (Ron Howard), and Supporting Actress (Jennifer Connelly). It also received four other nominations for Best Actor in a Leading Role (Russell Crowe), Film Editing (Mike Hill and Daniel P. Hanley), Best Makeup (Greg Cannom and Colleen Callaghan), and Original Music Score (James Horner).;; The 2002 BAFTAs awarded the film Best Actor and Best Actress to Russell Crowe and Jennifer Connelly, respectively. It also nominated the film for Best Film, Best Screenplay, and the David Lean Award for Direction.;; At the 2002 AFI Awards, Jennifer Connelly won for Best Featured Female Actor.;; The film was also nominated for Movie of the Year, Actor of the Year (Russell Crowe), and Screenwriter of the Year.;;

Historical accuracy
The film has been criticized for its inaccurate portrayal of Nash's life and schizophrenia as well as for the over-simplified representation of the Nash equilibrium. The filmmakers later stated that the film was not meant to be a literal representation.The difficulty was in portraying stress and mental illness within one person's mind.;; Sylvia Nasar stated about the film that the filmmakers had &quot;invented a narrative that, while far from a literal telling, is true to the spirit of Nash's story.&quot;;; It made his hallucinations visual and auditory when, in fact, they were exclusively auditory.It is true that his handlers, both from faculty and administration, had to introduce him to assistants and strangers.;;; ''A Beautiful Mind'' DVD commentary featuring Ron Howard, [2002];The PBS documentary ''A Brilliant Madness'' attempts to portray his life more accurately.;;

The film had other major departures from Nash's life.No mention is made of Nash's supposed homosexual experiences at RAND.;; Nash later denounced these accusations.;; Nash also fathered a son, John David Stier (born 19 June 1953), by Eleanor Agnes Stier (1921-2005), a nurse whom he abandoned when informed of her pregnancy.;;In 1962, Alicia filed for divorce.It wasn't until Nash won the Nobel Prize that they renewed their relationship.;;

Nash is shown to join Wheeler Laboratory at MIT, but there is no such lab. He was appointed as C.L.E. Moore Instructor at MIT.;; The pen ceremony tradition at Princeton shown in the film is completely fictitious.;;; ''A Beautiful Mind'' DVD commentary featuring Ron Howard, [2002]; The film has Nash saying around the time of his Nobel prize in 1994: &quot;I take the newer medications&quot;, when in fact Nash didn't take any medication from 1970 onwards, something Nash's biography highlights. Howard later stated that they added the line of dialogue because it was felt as though the film was encouraging the notion that all schizophrenics can overcome their illness without medication.; ''A Beautiful Mind'' DVD commentary featuring Ron Howard, [2002]; Nash also never gave an acceptance speech for his Nobel prize.;; Around the time of the Oscar nominations, Nash was accused of being anti-semitic. Nash denied this and it was speculated that the accusation was designed to affect the votes inside the Academy Awards.;;

DVD release
''A Beautiful Mind'' was released on DVD in the United States on June 25, 2002 as a two-disc set.;; The first disc featured two separate audio commentaries from director Ron Howard and Akiva Goldsman, deleted scenes with optional commentary from the director, and production notes. The second disc included documentaries such as &quot;Inside A Beautiful Mind&quot; a making-of documentary, &quot;A Beautiful Partnership: Ron Howard and Brian Grazer&quot; detailing the partnership between the director and the producer, &quot;Development of the Screenplay&quot; discussing Akiva Goldsman scripting of the film, &quot;The Process of Age Progression&quot; detailing the makeup effects, &quot;Casting Russell Crowe and Jennifer Connelly&quot;, &quot;Creation of the Special Effects&quot;, &quot;Scoring the Film&quot;, as well as &quot;Meeting John Nash&quot; displaying the real John Nash. Footage of the real John Nash accepting the Nobel Prize for Economics is also included along with reactions from the winners of the Academy Awards, storyboard comparisons, the theatrical trailer and the soundtrack to the film.

References




External links

*
*
*
*''[http://movies.msn.com/movies/movie.aspx?m=169&amp;pkw=PI&amp;vendor=Paid+Inclusion&amp;mp=m A Beautiful Mind]'' at [http://movies.msn.com/movies/ MSN Movies]





 









Category:2001 films
Category:American films
Category:Best Picture Academy Award winners
Category:Biographical films
Category:Drama films
Category:DreamWorks films
Category:English-language films
Category:Films based on actual events
Category:Films based on biographies
Category:Films directed by Ron Howard
Category:Films featuring a Best Supporting Actress Academy Award winning performance
Category:Films featuring a Best Supporting Actress Golden Globe winning performance
Category:Films featuring a Best Drama Actor Golden Globe winning performance
Category:Films whose director won the Best Director Academy Award
Category:Mathematical films
Category:Films set in the 1940s
Category:Films set in the 1950s
Category:Films set in the 1960s
Category:Films set in the 1970s
Category:Films set in the 1990s
Category:Psychiatrist films
Category:Universal Pictures films
Category:Films set in Massachusetts

ar:عقل جميل (فيلم)
bs:Genijalni um
bg:Красив ум
da:Et Smukt Sind
de:A Beautiful Mind – Genie und Wahnsinn
et:Piinatud geenius
es:A Beautiful Mind
eo:A Beautiful Mind (filmo)
fa:یک ذهن زیبا (فیلم)
fr:Un homme d'exception
hr:Genijalni um
id:A Beautiful Mind
is:A Beautiful Mind
it:A Beautiful Mind
he:נפלאות התבונה
lt:Nuostabus protas
mr:अ ब्युटिफुल माइंड, चित्रपट
nl:A Beautiful Mind
ja:ビューティフル・マインド
nn:A Beautiful Mind
pl:Piękny umysł
pt:A Beautiful Mind
ru:Игры разума (фильм, 2001)
simple:A Beautiful Mind
sr:Блистави ум
fi:Kaunis mieli
sv:A Beautiful Mind
tr:Akıl Oyunları (film)
uk:Ігри розуму
zh:美丽心灵