

Ernest Raymond Herbert Toshack (8 December 1914&amp;ndash;11 May 2003) was an Australian cricketer who played in 12 Tests from 1946 to 1948. A left arm medium paced bowler who was known for his accuracy and stamina in his application of leg theory, Toshack was best known for being as member of Don Bradman's ''Invincibles'' that toured England in 1948 without incurring a defeat, where he reinforced Australia's new ball attack of Ray Lindwall and Keith Miller. 

Born in 1914, Toshack overcame many obstacles to reach international level cricket. He was orphaned as an infant, and had his early cricket career hindered due to the economic difficulties of the Great Depression. The Second World War meant that Toshack did not get an opportunity at first-class level until he was into his thirties. In 1945&amp;ndash;46, the first season of cricket after the end of the War, Toshack made his first-class debut, and after only seven matches in the Sheffield Shield, he was selected for Australia's tour of New Zealand. In a fixture in Wellington, he opened the bowling in a match that was retrospectively given Test status. Toshack thereafter became a regular member of the Australian team, playing in all of its Tests until the 1947&amp;ndash;48 series against India. He took career-best match figures of 11/31 in the First Test but began to suffer recurring knee injuries, which necessitated a vote by a medical board to approve his selection for the 1948 England tour. Toshack was a first-choice selection, playing in the first four Tests before being injured, necessitating a long layoff. He attempted a comeback during Australia's 1949&amp;ndash;50 season, but further injury forced him to retire.

Early years

Born in the New South Wales bush town of Cobar on December 8, 1914, he was the son of a stationmaster, but was orphaned as an infant. He was raised by relatives in Lyndhurst, in the northwest of the state. He played his early cricket and rugby league for Cowra.;; In his youth he was also a boxer, and earned the nickname &quot;Johnson&quot; for his resemblance to American black heavyweight champion Jack Johnson due his dark skin. In the mid 1930s, he made brief appearances for the State Colts and 2nd XI.; ; His cricket aspirations, already hindered due to economic difficulties caused by the Great Depression were interrupted after he was wheelchair-bound for months after a ruptured appendix in 1938.; Not allowed to enlist in the Australian Defence Force during the Second World War due to these concerns, he worked at Lithgow’s Small Arms factory, in the Blue Mountains west of Sydney. Only at the end of the war, aged 30 did he venture to Sydney. At the time, he was a fastish left-arm bowler and approached Petersham, the club for which he was residentially zoned. After they rejected him he joined Marrickville in Sydney Grade Cricket, starting in third grade in 1944-45.; Within two matches, he rose to first grade.;

First class and Test debut

Upon the resumption of first class cricket in 1945&amp;ndash;46, he made his debut for New South Wales against Queensland as an opening bowler aged almost 31, and was quickly among the wickets. He took 4/69 in his first innings as his team fell to a six wicket loss.;; At the end of the season inMarch 1946, Toshack had taken 35 wickets in seven first class matches, at an average of 18.82, making him the second highest wicket-taker behind George Tribe with 40. He performed consistently without taking large innings hauls; his innings best was 4/30.;; Toshack was selected for a tour of New Zealand and found himself opening the bowling for Australia with fellow debutant Ray Lindwall in a match at Wellington which was retrospectively recognised as a Test two years later.; The eight years since Australia's last Test saw a new post-war generation of international cricketers make their debut. Toshack was one of seven Australians making their Test debut. New Zealand were routed in two days on a damp pitch, having been dismissed for 42 in their first innings after winning the toss and choosing to bat. Toshack's first wicket was that of opposing captain Walter Hadlee, who was caught by Keith Miller. Toshack took three further wickets to end with 4/12. Toshack did not bat as Australia made 8/198. New Zealand were then bowled out in their second innings for 54, with Toshack taking 2/6 as Australia took an innings victory. He dismissed Eric Tindill and Ces Burke in both innings.;; The performance ensured that Toshack would become an integral part of Australia’s attack for the next three years.;;
Keith Miller replaced Toshack as Lindwall's new ball partner. 
Toshack was selected to make his Ashes debut against the England cricket team in the First Test of the 1946&amp;ndash;47 home series in Brisbane. With the emergence of leading all rounder Keith Miller, Toshack was relegated to first change bowler as Miller began his much celebrated partnership with Lindwall. Toshack was unbeaten on one in his first innings with the bat when Australia were bowled out for 645 on the third day. 
On a sticky wicket, Toshack initially struggled, bowling his characteristic leg stump line. England managed to reach 5/117 at the end of the fourth day after multiple rain interruptions. Norman Yardley and captain Wally Hammond had defied the Australian bowlers since coming together at 5/66. On the fifth and final morning, captain Don Bradman advised him to pitch straighter and at a slower pace. Having started the day wicketless, Toshack removed Yardley and Hammond in the space of 13 runs to break the English resistance and finished with an economical 3/17 from 17 overs as England were bowled out for 141. Bradman enforced the follow-on, and with Lindwall injured, Toshack took the new ball with Miller. He continued where he finished in the first innings, taking four of the first six wickets as the English top order were reduced to 6/65. He ended the match with 6/82 as England were bowled out twice in a day to lose by an innings and 332 runs.;; The remaining four Tests were less successful: only in one innings did he take more than one wicket. In the Second Test, the pitch favoured spin bowling and Toshack only bowled 13 overs without taking a wicket as Australia claimed another innings victory. He took match figures of 2/127 before returning to form in the Fourth Test in Adelaide Test, where he took 5/66 from a long spell of 66 eight ball overs in extreme heat.;;;Toshack finished the series with 17 wickets at a bowling average of 25.71.;; His first class season was not a productive as in his debut year; he took 33 wickets at an average of 30.93 in eleven matches, placing him sixth on the wicket-taking list.;;

The following 1947&amp;ndash;48 season, in the First Test against India at Brisbane, Toshack collected his only ten wicket match haul in Tests. In reply to Australia's 382, India had been reduced to 5/23 by Lindwall, Miller and Bill Johnston before Vijay Hazare and captain Lala Amarnath took the score to 53 without further loss, prompting Toshack's introduction into the attack. He removed both and ended with 5/2 in 19 balls as India were bowled out after adding only five further runs. Bradman enforced the follow on and India reached 1/27 before a spell of 6/29 from Toshack reduced them to 8/89. India were bowled out for 98 as Australia won by an innings and 226 runs.;;; Injury persistently curtailed Toshack during the season, and he played only in one further Test, the Fourth, where he was less successful with match figures of 2/139.; When he was available, Toshack was a heavy wicket-taker; his 41 wickets at 20.26 placed him second only to Johnston's 42 among Australian bowlers in the season.;;

''Invincibles'' tour

By the end of the Indian series, knee injuries had begun to hamper Toshack, and he only made the trip to England for the 1948 tour on a 3&amp;ndash;2 majority vote by a medical team, despite being one of the first selected by the board. The tour was to guarantee him immortality as a member of Bradman's ''Invincibles''. He grew tired of signing autographs during the voyage, and entrusted a friend with the task. As a result,there are still sheets with his name mis-spelt as ''Toshak''. Between the new-ball attacks of Lindwall, Keith Miller and Johnston every 55 overs, Toshack played the role of stifling England's scoring. In one match against Sussex, his 17 overs yielded only three scoring shots. He finished the match bowling 32 overs while conceding 29 runs. At Bramall Lane, Sheffield, he recorded the best innings analysis of his first class career, taking 7/81 from 40 consecutive overs, bemusing the Yorkshire spectators with the his accent and distinctive &quot;Ow Wizz Ee&quot; appealing. Bradman considered his 6/51 against the Marylebone Cricket Club at Lord's as the best performance of all.;;
Toshack, standing at the left of the middle row, along with his ''Invincibles'' teammates|400px|thumb|left
Toshack's performance in the First Test at Trent Bridge was a quite one, taking a wicket in each innings. He was involved in an aggressive final wicket partnership of 32 with Johnston, scoring 19 runs, his best at Test level to date in just 18 minutes. Toshack's best Test performance was his 5/40 in the second innings of the Second Test at Lord’s when Miller was unable to bowl after being injured, including the wickets of Cyril Washbrook and John Edrich. He had a moderate Third Test, taking figures of 3/101 in the only Test that Australia did not win. His knee injury flared again in the Fourth Test after taking an ineffective 1/112 in the first innings and he was taken to London for cartilage surgery, ending his tour and his Test career.; An inept batsman with an average of 5.78 in first class fixtures, Toshack managed a Test average of 51 on the 1948 tour after being out only once, behind only Arthur Morris, Sid Barnes, Bradman and Neil Harvey. The unbeaten 20 he managed in the Lord's Test was his best first-class score, made in a uninhibited tenth-wicket stand with Johnston.;;

The back injury kept Toshack from playing a match during the 1948&amp;ndash;1949 Australian domestic season.;; At the start of the 1949&amp;ndash;50 season, after he took nine wickets in a Shield match in Brisbane, a back injury made forced him to retire from first class cricket. Toshack subsequently joined a firm of builders and spent 25 years as a foreman and supervisor on construction sites around Sydney.; He was survived by a wife and daughter.;;

Style

Bowling primarily from over the wicket, his accuracy, changes of pace, and movement in both directions, coupled with a leg stump line to a packed leg-side field, made scoring off him difficult.; He achieved his success in a manner not dissimilar to Derek Underwood a generation later. His accuracy and stamina allowed Ray Lindwall and Keith Miller, one of Australia’s finest fast bowling pairs of all time, to draw breath between short and incisive bursts of pace and swing.;;; Standing 6 ft 2 in, he was particularly effective on rain-affected wickets, reducing his speed to medium pace and using a repertoire of offcutters, inswingers, outswingers and leg breaks. Bowling a leg-stump line from over the wicket with a leg side cordon of two short legs and a silly mid-on, he was described by Bradman as &quot;unique in every way&quot;.;;

Nicknamed the &quot;Black Prince&quot;, Toshack's looks and sense of humour made him a crowd favourite, as did his theatrical appealing. His sense of fun was often on show. While on tour, he would often wear a bowler hat, grab a furled umbrella, and place a cigar in his mouth, parodying an Englishman.;;
References


External links
*[http://content-aus.cricinfo.com/ci/content/player/7960.html Cricinfo article on Ernie Toshack]




Category:1914 births
Category:2003 deaths
Category:Australian Test cricketers
Category:New South Wales cricketers
Category:The Invincibles

mr:अर्नी टोशॅक