 |
birth_place = Brooklyn, New York, U.S. |
death_date =|
death_place = Clementon, NJ, USA
}} 

Arthur Rose Eldred (August 16, 1895 &amp;ndash; January 4, 1951) was an American agricultural official and executive who, as a teenager, became the first Eagle Scout in the Boy Scouts of America (BSA) on August 21, 1912, just two years after the BSA was founded in 1910. Eldred also received the Bronze Honor Medal for lifesaving, and was the first of three generations of Eagle Scouts.

As an adult, Eldred served in the United States Navy during World War I and then worked in the agriculture and produce transportation industries. He was an active Scout leader and school board member throughout his life.

Scouting as a youth
Eldred was born in Brooklyn, New York and raised in Oceanside, Long Island, New York by his mother after his father died.Eldred’s older brother, Hubert W. Eldred, was instrumental in starting Troop 1 of Rockville Centre, Oceanside, Long Island, New York in November 1910.Troop 1 was fully uniformed and their appearance so impressed Chief Scout Executive James E. West (Scouting)|James E. West that he asked the troop to serve as honor guard for the visit of Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell|Baden-Powell, the founder of Scouting. West paid the expenses for the troop to travel to New York on January 31, 1912. Baden-Powell inspected Troop 1, and spoke with Eldred at some length.;;;;
Arthur Eldred's Eagle Scout medal, courtesy National Scout Museum
In March 1911, Eldred earned First Class rank. In April of 1912, he completed the twenty-one merit badges required for Eagle Scout. Merit badges are awards for mastering skills taught in the Scouting program. At the time, only 141 merit badges had then been earned by about 50 Scouts. As originally implemented, Eagle Scout was part of the merit badge system and was not a rank. Thus Eldred, like several of the early Eagles, did not earn the Life or Star awards that preceded Eagle Scout.;;;; Eldred's merit badges were noted in the Honor Roll of the August 1912 edition of ''Boys' Life''.;;

Eldred did not have a troop board of review, a review bythe adult troop leaders to ensure eligibility. Instead, Eldred had a thorough National Board of Review consisting of Chief Scout Executive James E. West, Chief Scout Ernest Thompson Seton, National Scout Commissioner Daniel Carter Beard and Wilbert E. Longfellow, who had written articles on life-saving and swimming in the ''Handbook for Boys''. West informed Eldred of his Eagle award in a letter dated August 21, 1912. This letter also informed Eldred of the delay in the medal, caused by the fact that the design of the Eagle Scout medal had not been finalized. Eldred was awarded Eagle Scout on Labor Day, September 2, 1912.

In August 1912, Eldred was camping with the troop in Orange Lake, New York. While swimming in the lake, Melvin Daly, another Scout who was 15 and a non-swimmer, began to drown.Eldred rescued Daly with the assistance of Merritt Cutler.Chief Scout Seton presented Eldred with the Honor Medal for this action.

Education and career
Eldred entered Cornell University in the fall of 1912 to study agriculture, and graduated in 1916. At the university, Eldred was president of the Cornell University Agricultural Association and participated in track and cross-country.;;

Eldred enlisted in the United States Navy in January 1918, during World War I. He was initially assigned to the Philadelphia Navy Yard before shipping out on the transport WSS ''Henderson'' on Sunday, June 30, 1918 from Bush Terminal in Brooklyn, New York for overseas duty. On June 1, 1918 his convoy spotted two enemy submarines and attacked them with depth charges. It is not known whether the submarines were damaged. On June 2, 1918 there was a fire onboard the Henderson that resulted in the ship sinking. All but one or two of those onboard were rescued by other ships in the convoy. Eldred was eventually taken aboard the ''USS Von Steuben'' (ID-3017) and continued to Brest, France, where his knowledge of French proved useful.;; From there, he wassent by train to Italy.;;;;

Eldred arrived in Italy in July 1918 and eventually at Sub Chaser Base 25, located in Corfu, Greece in September 1918.There he served as a machinist aboardsubmarine chaser SC-244, where they patrolled the Strait of Otranto and were engaged in combat. While in Corfu, Eldred and many others got sick with the flu during the 1918 flu pandemic. The conditions at the hospital were so bad that he had to crawl to a stream to get water, which resulted in a permanent scar on his left hip. Eldred began his return to the United States and arrived in Malta on December 25, 1918. By February 1919, he was in Gibraltar. He was given the option of staying in the Navy until they arrived home in six months or being discharged and paying his own way home. He elected the discharge and was separated from the Navy on March 4, 1919. He met some U.S. Army soldiers who were en route to America aboard an Army troop ship.;; They took him aboard as a stowaway and loaned him an Army uniform. Eldred slept in a life boat on the way back to America.;

After the war, Eldred worked for a dairy, and in 1921 became the agricultural agent for Atlantic County, New Jersey where he established the Atlantic City municipal market for farm products.He later promoted produce transportation for the Reading Railroad.As the trucking industry became a major produce carrier, Eldred became the manager of the Motor Carrier Committee of the Eastern Railroad Association. He also served on the Camden County Council, the Clementon Board of Education, and was president of the Overbrook regional school board.;;

Adult Scouting life and descendants
(''l-r'') unknown, Arthur Eldred, Willard Eldred (his son), at Willard's Eagle Scout ceremony.
Eldred was a board of review examiner throughout the 1920s. He was later the troop committee chairman for Troop 77&amp;nbsp;in Clementon, New Jersey.Eldred's descendants have followed in his footsteps. Eldred was present when his eldest son, Willard &quot;Bill&quot; G. Eldred, had his Eagle Scout ceremony on October 27, 1944. Eldred also had a second son and one daughter.;; His grandson, Willard Eldred, is also an Eagle Scout. Three of his great-grandsons, Kyle Kern, Tyler Eldred, and Bobby Hitte, are Scouts as of March 2007, working towards Eagle Scout.;; Eldred died at the age of 55 from colon cancer on January 4, 1951 at his home in Clementon.;; He is buried in Berlin Cemetery, Berlin, New Jersey.;;

The National Eagle Scout Association chapter of the BSA's Theodore Roosevelt Council in Massapequa, New York is named in honor of Eldred.;;

See also

*Distinguished Eagle Scout Award
*List of notable Eagle Scouts

References


External links
*[http://www.subchaser.org/sc244 Photo of SC-244, which Eldred served on]





Category:1895 births
Category:1951 deaths
Category:Cornell University alumni
Category:Eagle Scouts