The American Empire series is a trilogy of alternate history novels by Harry Turtledove. It follows How Few Remain and the Great War trilogy, and is part of the Timeline-191 series.

=Novels=
* 2001 ''American Empire: Blood and Iron''
* 2002 ''American Empire: The Center Cannot Hold''
* 2003 ''American Empire: The Victorious Opposition''

=American Empire=
Following the Great War, the United States and German Empire are the dominant world powers. The United States has occupied Canada (less the Republic of Quebec, a U.S. puppet state) and Sequoyah (Oklahoma), has annexed Kentucky and portions of Texas, Arkansas, Sonora and Virginia, and has placed the rebellious state of Utah under military occupation. Having led the U.S. to victory, Theodore Roosevelt now faces a challenge to his third-term bid by the Socialist candidate Upton Sinclair, and struggles to maintain order in the occupied territories as rebels and terrorists strike. 

Meanwhile, in a defeated Confederacy wracked by inflation and despair, a former Confederate Army sergeant named Jake Featherston and his Freedom Party are preaching a message of hate, blaming the southern aristocracy and the &quot;niggers who Stab-in-the-back legend|stabbed us in the back&quot; for the Confederacy's defeat.

The European situations mirrors North America: the aging Kaiser Wilhelm II and his victorious Germans fight to holdonto captured Belgium, Alsace-Lorraine, and the Ukraine, and their vassal state of Poland. The Roman Catholic fascists of Action Française wish to topple the Third Republic and enthrone Charles XI, while Mosley's Silver Shirts are a growing power in the British Parliament. 

As the 1920s draw to a close the world economy crashes and the Great Depression begins, paving the way for fanatics and demagogues the world over to seize power.

=Timeline-191=
It is followed by the Settling Accounts tetralogy, of which the first book Return Engagement was published in August 2004.


Category:Novels by Harry Turtledove
Category:Science fiction book series
Category:Novel series
Category:Timeline-191

