Kearny Street.
Kearny Street in San Francisco, California runs from Market Street on the south to The Embarcadero on the north.Along its southern end, the street serves as the border separating the Financial District from the city's Union Square and Chinatown districts.Further north, it passes over the top of Telegraph Hill.

History
Kearny Street was originally named &quot;La Calle de la Fundacion&quot; by the Spanish.Translated, this means &quot;street of the foundation.&quot;The origin of the present name, Kearny Street, is generally assumed to be Stephen Watts Kearny, the first military governor of California under U.S. rule.;;Other possible namesakes include Denis Kearney, General Phil Kearny.;; 

At Kearny and Clay, the first cable car in America, invented by Andrew S. Hallidie, on August 2, 1873, climbed five blocks up the Clay Street hill.

From the turn of the twentieth century until 1977, the area around the intersection of Kearny and Jackson Streets was home to a large Filipino population, and earned the nickname Manilatown.Located at 848 Kearny Street, the I-Hotel|International Hotel served as the heart of Manilatown.In its heyday of the 1920s and 1930s, the estimated population of Manilatown was between 20,000 and 40,000 people.
;;, ;;In 1968, the hotel was sold to developers intending to replace it with more profitable commercial property.After a protracted court battle, the remaining two hundred odd tenants were forcibly evicted on 4 August 1977.On 27 July 2004, a two block stretch of Kearny St. was officially declared to be Manilatown.

Landmarks
Landmarks along Kearny Street include Lotta's Fountain at Market Street, where 1906 Earthquake commemorations are held; the 555 California Street, the city's second tallest skyscraper; the location of the old Hall of Justice at Kearny and Clay Streets now occupied by the Holiday Inn; the eastern border of Portsmouth Square, the original Plaza of the pueblo of Yerba Buena; and Coit Tower, at the top of Telegraph Hill.

Referencse


Other Uses
* &quot;Kearny Street&quot; is a song by American composer Rod McKuen.

See also
*O'Brien, Robert,''This is San Francisco.'' 1948. 1994 Chronicle Books ISBN 0-8118-0578-6




Category:Streets in San Francisco, California
Category:History of San Francisco


