 
;;
''All'Ultimo Lavoro'';(Dante:&quot;The utmost for the highest&quot;);;
|established= 1888;;
|type = Independent, Single-sex school|Single-sex, Day &amp; Boarding
|denomination = Presbyterian
|slogan = &quot;Take up the challenge&quot;;;
|key_people = Dr. William T. McKeith (Principal);Rev. Peter Hastie (Chairman);Miss. Carolyn Turner (Chaplain)
|fees = AU$11,988 p.a-AU$18,656 p.a (Day School);AU$30,512 p.a-AU$35,272 p.a (Boarding School);;
|city = Croydon
|state= New South Wales
|country= Australia 
|coordinates=
|enrolment= ~1,350 (R-12);;
|num_employ = ~125;;
|revenue= AU$24,605,888 (2006);
|products = 
|colours= Red &amp; White;; 
|homepage = [http://www.plc.nsw.edu.au www.plc.nsw.edu.au]
}}
The Presbyterian Ladies' College, Sydney (P.L.C. Sydney), is an independent, Presbyterian, day and boarding school for girls, located in Croydon, an inner-western suburb of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.;; It is the oldest continuously running Presbyterian Church school in New South Wales.;;

Founded in 1888 by a committee of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales, the school has a non-selective enrolment policy for all years apart from Year 11,;; and currently caters for approximately 1350 girls from Branxton Reception (4 years old) to Year 12 (18 years old), including 70 boarders. Student's attend P.L.C from all regions of the greater metropolitan area, New South Wales country regions, and overseas.;

The college is affiliated with the Association of Heads of Independent Schools of Australia (AHISA),;; the Junior School Heads Association of Australia (JSHAA),;; the Australian Boarding Schools' Association,;; and is a founding member of the Association of Heads of Independent Girls' Schools (AHIGS).;; P.L.C is also one of only two Round Square schools in Sydney.;;

In 2001, ''The Sun-Herald'' ranked P.L.C Sydney fourth in Australia's top ten girls' schools, based on the number of its alumni mentioned in the ''Who's Who in Australia'' (a listing of notable Australians).;;

History
The Presbyterian Ladies' College, Sydney was the first Presbyterian school for girls, and the second Presbyterian school (after the now defunct Cooerwull Academy for boys' in 1882) established in the colony of New South Wales.; 

=Foundation=
The school was founded with 39 girls, on 30 January 1888, at &quot;Fernlea&quot;, a fourteen-roomed gentleman's residence set in three acres of ground at Victoria Street, Ashfield, the current site of the Masonic Hospital. This establishment saw the culmination of five years work by a committee of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of N.S.W.; ;
PLC's first Principal, Dr. John Marden
The decision to commence a Ladies' College was made in 1883 when the Assembly formed a special committee to investigate the establishment of Superior Boarding Schools for girls and boys. The church saw an urgency to provide Presbyterian education in the colony due to the growth in Roman Catholic secondary schools. Many expressed fear of the outcome of this growth with Rev. James Cameron stating:

The New South Wales Scottish community had also expressed dissatisfaction with the educational options available to their children. The N.S.W Assembly was, however, also inspired to establish a Ladies' College by less worthy motives. For example, in the &quot;rival&quot; colony of Victoria, Presbyterians had had a Ladies' College since 1875, and so it was felt that N.S.W Presbyterians should also have one. Further, other Protestant denominations had Ladies' Colleges, therefore the Presbyterians should have one too.; 

By July 1887, the committee had purchased the Ashfield property and advertised far and wide for an appropriate principal. They unanimously selected Dr. John Marden, a science master from the Methodist Ladies' College in Melbourne, &quot;because of his high academic standing, his experience and success in teaching and his high Christian character&quot;.;; Marden was a strong believer in equal opportunity in education, and has been described as an &quot;early feminist&quot; and &quot;truly a man before his time&quot;. He was once quoted as saying: ;|John Marden}} 

By August 1888, the College had outgrown the Ashfield residence, which had always been considered a temporary home, and Council began discussing alternative sites in the nearby suburb of Croydon. On 5 September 1889, Col. John Hay Goodlet told the council of &quot;Shubra Hall&quot;, the home of Anthony Hordern III at Croydon, and urged Council to purchase it. Subsequently, the property was purchased on 26 October for £7,500. Plans were promptly drawn up for the additional buildings required, and by the beginning of the school year of 1891, the new site was complete and ready to commence furnishing as the permanent home of P.L.C.;; Marden consolidated the new school and, keenly interested in horticulture, laid out beautiful gardens and playing fields.;;

''The Presbyterian'' reported of the opening of the College on 10 March, by the new Governor of N.S.W., the Victor Child-Villiers, 7th Earl of Jersey|Rt. Hon. Victor Albert George, Earl of Jersey at its new site: 
 ;}}

The opening of the new buildings received wide publicity in the papers of March 1891. This was principally due to an impromptu speech made by the Countess of Jersey, Margaret Child-Villiers, of which was considered a controversial and ground-breaking move, as it was most unusual for women to speak in public. Encouraged by her husband, the Countess spoke of the opportunities available to girls at the college, the future role of Australian women, and the need for life-long learning. P.L.C's &quot;Jersey Day&quot;, an annual event where ex-students return to the college on the Sunday closest to 10 March, is named in the Countesses honour.;;
PLC &quot;Main School&quot; (built 1890)
By 1902, space had again become a problem due to increasing enrolments. Marden urged that new classrooms be built, which Council reluctantly agreed to. These buildings comprising six classrooms downstairs and eighteen rooms upstairs, were finished and handed over by the contractor on 6 October 1904, at a cost of £2,000. This increase in enrolments also convinced Council of the need to set up a branch school on another site, preferably on the North Shore. A committee was set up in June 1907 to study the feasibility of a second school, yet recommendations were not considered by the Council. By 1913, space at the college was at a premium. Marden reported that many applications were being refused because of &quot;shortness of space&quot;. This matter was taken to the General Assembly of 1913, resulting in the approval of the establishment of a branch at Pymble under the Council of P.L.C Sydney. The Council was given £5,000 to erect new buildings and lay out the grounds. &quot;The Presbyterian Ladies' College, Pymble&quot; was opened on 8 February, 1916 with 48 day girls and 86 boarders.;
This school is still in existence, and is now known as &quot;Pymble Ladies' College&quot;. The opening of the Pymble campus necessitated a change of name for the Croydon college, from &quot;The Presbyterian Ladies' College, Sydney&quot; to The Presbyterian Ladies' College, Croydon.;

The &quot;Presbyterian Ladies' College, Beecroft&quot; was established by P.L.C Sydney in 1924 with thirteen students. It was to serve as a primary feeder school for the College, however it did not receive adequate attention from college council and was forced to close in 1929. This school was reopened in 1930 by the assistant teacher, Miss Gurney, who named it &quot;Arden&quot;. The school flourished under Gurney's leadership and thus &quot;Arden Anglican School&quot; is still in existence today.;;

=World War Two=
1942 saw major upheaval and difficulties for the college. The new Principal, Dr. Helen Wilkie, arrived to find falling enrolments, staffing problems and food shortages due to the effects of the raging Second World War. The situation was made much worse as word was received that Australian military authorities wished to inspect the school with a view to taking it over. On 24 March 1942, it was requested that the school be occupied by the Royal Australian Air Force for the purpose of establishing a top secret Radar Unit and military barracks;; known as No.1 RIMU (Radio Installation and Maintenance Unit).;; As a result, Council approached Meriden School in Strathfield to see if P.L.C could be accommodated there. Meriden kindly agreed to house the P.L.C boarders and to accommodate singing, domestic science, and physical education classes.;
Further, the school purchased &quot;Lingwood&quot;, a property in Strathfield, as a centre for the schools remaining activities.
In spite of the apparent happy association with Meriden, Dr. Wilkie, recommended that further integration with the school should not proceed, and thus at the end of 1924, Meriden indicated that they would no longer house the P.L.C boarders.;

From here, P.L.C moved to &quot;Lauriston&quot; (now the primary school of Santa Sabina College) and &quot;Welbeck&quot;, on The Boulevarde at Strathfield. In July 1944, the owners of Lingwood asked if the school was interested in buying the property. Council agreed to the purchase in order to use the house as a Kindergarten feeder school for the college, or as a site for a permanent move. A few months later, Council decided that the future of P.L.C lay in Strathfield and not in Croydon, and offered the Croydon campus to the military for £36,500. Plans were subsequently drawn up to purchase Welbeck and Lauriston to form the new P.L.C.; 

Council's wish for the school to stay in Strathfield was not shared by most,; with one student writing:
;|Peggy Levy}}
&quot;Lauriston&quot;, Part of P.L.C's war-time Strathfield Campus
In 1945, after intervention by the Education Trust of the N.S.W General Assembly, which had been investigating the future of the college, Council decided that the Strathfield proposal was not viable. It was agreed that P.L.C would reopen at Croydon in first term 1946. The military agreed to pay for the extensive renovations that were needed, with the final cheque handed over from the government on 21 March 1949. &quot;Lauriston&quot; and &quot;Welbeck&quot; were subsequently disposed of in 1946, however, the Lingwood property was retained as a preparatory school. Negotiations were entered into with Miss Margaret Thompson, the owner and principal of &quot;Branxton&quot;, a private school in Homebush Road, Strathfield. It was agreed that Thompson would close her school and move it to the Lingwood property where it would retain the name &quot;Branxton&quot;, and come under the control of P.L.C Council. Branxton had an informal link to the College prior to 1946, as it had been founded by the sister of an ex-student, and many Branxton students had gone on to complete their high school education at P.L.C.;

Legacies of P.L.C's war-time occupation remain, with tunnel's and bomb shelter's accessible from below the stage of &quot;College Hall&quot;. A plaque presented to the school by the RAAF in commemoration of P.L.C's war-time involvement, may be found at the entrance to the Main School, on the school Verandah.

=Church Union=
In 1977, a Union of the Congregational, Methodist and Presbyterian Churches took place, forming the Uniting Church of Australia. Approximately half of the Presbyterian Church decided to remain Presbyterian and consequently the property of the Church had to be divided. In May of that year, it was announced that P.L.C Croydon was to remain Presbyterian and P.L.C Pymble would be transferred, and its name changed to &quot;Pymble Ladies' College&quot;. Subsequently, in 1978 it was decided that P.L.C Croydon should return to its originally intended name of &quot;The Presbyterian Ladies' College, Sydney&quot;.;;

Principals
{| class=&quot;wikitable&quot;
|-
!Period
!Details;;
|-
|1887 &amp;ndash; 1919
|Dr John Marden, B.A. LL.D. (Melbourne) Principal of both Croydon and Pymble Colleges from 1916
|- 
|1920 &amp;ndash; 1929
|Dr E. Neil McQueen, M.A. (Melbourne), D.Sc.(London). Vice-Principal of both Colleges until 1920
|-
|1929 &amp;ndash; 1931
|Acting Principal &amp;ndash; Miss Anna Drennan, M.A.(Edinburgh). Acting Principal at Pymble 1928
|-
|1933 &amp;ndash; 1941
|Miss Mary Hamilton, B.A., Dip. Ed. (Melbourne)
|-
|1942 &amp;ndash; 1945
|Dr Helen Isabella Wilkie, M.A., Ph.D. (Edinburgh) Principal of P.L.C Armidale 1938 &amp;ndash; 1941
|-
|1946 &amp;ndash; 1956
|Miss Eunice Macindoe, B.Sc. (Sydney) Ex-Student of P.L.C Sydney (Class of 1921)
|-
|1957
|Acting Principal &amp;ndash; Miss Jean Tassie, B.A
|-
|1958 &amp;ndash; 1976
|Miss Freda L. Whitlam, B.A., Dip. Ed. (Melbourne) M.A. (Yale)
|-
|1977
|Acting Principal &amp;ndash; Mrs Norma Brown, B.A., Dip. Ed
|-
|1978 &amp;ndash; 1985
|Miss Patricia Dyson, M.A., Dip. Ed. (Sydney)
|-
|1986 &amp;ndash; Present
|Dr William T. McKeith, B.A., Dip. Ed. (Macquarie), M.A. (Sydney), M.B.A. (Leicester), Ed. D. (Leicester), F.A.C.E., F.A.I.M. Principal of both P.L.C Armidale and P.L.C Sydney from 2005.;;
|-
|}

Campus
The Presbyterian Ladies' College, Sydney is situated on a 5&amp;nbsp;hectare campus featuring a mix of 19th century and modern buildings, historic landscaped gardens and fields. The school is located adjacent to Croydon Railway Station, and is within 15 minutes of the Sydney central business district, Sydney University, and the University of Technology.; 
The school has grown significantly since its foundation, particularly since the 1980s.;

Some notable facilities of the college include: 
*Amphitheatre Built as part of the Science Courtyard redevelopment. An outdoor space for school performances and classes. Incorporates the Year 12 common room and its outdoor facilities. Opened 1997. 
*Arlington The Principal's residence. Purchased in 2003, built 1863.;;
*Boarding School. A modern boarding environment (on the top floor of the Main School) for 75 girls. Years 6 to 9 are housed in Mance corridor in rooms containing 3 to 6 girls, 10 and 11 in Taylor corridor in twin rooms, and year 12 girls have private rooms in McKenzie corridor. Opened 1890. 
*Boat Shed A leased facility for rowing in Drummoyne, as part of Drummoyne Rowing Club. Opened 1994. 
*College Hall The original school hall, which is now used for chapel services, social events and school meetings. Opened 1890. 
*The Croydon A Creative Arts Centre featuring Drawing, Paint, Ceramic, Food Technology, Woodworking, Textiles, Photography and Print studios together with computing facilities and The Adelaide Perry Gallery, an art gallery with regular exhibitions open to the school and wider community. Formerly the Croydon Hotel, this facility was purchased in 1997, and opened after conversions in 2000.;;
*Drummond Field A large sporting field.;; Opened 1989 after the purchase of houses and sections of Grosvenor, Meta and Elizabeth Streets.;
*Evandale The prep-school for girls from Reception to Year 2. Situated across the road from the main campus, Evandale was formerly &quot;The Evandale School&quot;. Purchased 1992. Opened 1993.; 
*The Extension Centre A centre for children identified as gifted and talented, as well as coaching and tutoring. Opened 2000. 
*Freda Whitlam School of Science A three storey building housing Science facilities.; Opened 1997. 
*Hamilton Hall The junior school assembly space. 
*Hennessy Street Year 3 classrooms. Opened 1998.
Main School Tower
*JD Oates Aquatic Institute Equipped with 2 heated indoor swimming pool's, classrooms, staffroom and changerooms. Opened 2006.;;
*Junior School Housing classrooms for Years 4 to 6. Built on the site of the defunct boys' school, &quot;Rugby House&quot;. Formerly used as a Principal's residence until 1942, then staff and boarders until 1962. Purchased 1906, current form built in 1963.; 
*Lindley Evans Music Centre Featuring private music tuition rooms, music composition labs and classrooms. Opened 1989.; Due for redevelopment in 2006/2007 following the opening of the new Performing Arts Centre.
*Macindoe Library The college's main library, with separate floors for Junior and Senior School students.; Opened 1992. 
*Main School L-shaped building (the first extension to &quot;Shubra Hall&quot;) by Sydney Town Hall architect, Albert Bond. Currently houses the boarders dining room, cafeteria, classrooms, College Hall and the Bursar's office. This National Trust listed building is notable for its large stained glass window and 84&amp;nbsp;ft tall tower. Opened 1890.
*Marden Memorial Library Affectionately known as &quot;Marden&quot;, this building was designed and built by the Ex-Students' Union as a memorial to former Principal, Dr. John Marden. Marden is no longer used as a library due to its small size, rather it provides a venue for band practice and archival displays. Opened 1927.;
*McQueen Seminar Room Offering conference facilities.; Opened 2001.;
*Performing Arts Centre Including the 550 seat Audrey Keown Theatre with orchestra pit, three music rehearsal rooms, three music classroms, computer composition laboratory, 12 music tutorial rooms, and a recording studio.; Incorporates Harmsworth, the former Principal's residence. Opened 2006.
Shubra Hall|right|260px
*Shubra Hall The original home of Anthony Hordern III and his family, &quot;Shubra&quot; is the college's oldest original building. Previously a residence for the College Principal's, it is now used as the main executive administration area. Built 1869, opened with additions in 1890. 
*The Stables Originally used as the College stables and loft, this building now houses the College reception, school shop and archives. Built 1869. 
*Studio Theatre A theatre space for drama, debating and house/year meetings.; Opened 1995.;
* Four Tennis Courts
*Thompson Hall A multi-purpose hall featuring a sprung floor gymnasium, foam pit and a weights and conditioning centre.; Opened 1987.; 
*Transition House A terrace house for the &quot;Transition class&quot; (girls with mild to moderate intellectual disabilities) life skills program. Opened 1998.;
*West Wing An extension to the Main School, currently housing classrooms downstairs and Year 12 boarder's upstairs. Opened 1904.;;

Fees
As with all Australian independent schools, P.L.C is not a full fee paying institution, due to it receiving limited government funding; full fees only apply to international students, who are not subsidised by any government funding. For non-international students, 2007 fees range from AUD$11,988 to AUD$18,656 per annum, and in excess of AUD$30,000 per annum for boarding students.;

P.L.C Sydney offers scholarships and bursaries that provide all or part remission of tuition fees to students who are Australian citizens, Permanent Residents of Australia or refugees. Academic scholarships are based on the results of the ACER Scholarship Examination, and are typically offered from Year 7 onwards. In addition to those awarded for academic performance, P.L.C also offers music and boarding scholarships. Indigenous Bursary's are available for students of Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander background, and are awarded following an interview with the Principal where the situation of the individual student and the family is considered.;;

Motto and crest
{|style=&quot;padding: 0.3em; float:right; margin-left:15px; border: 1px solid #B8C7D9; background:#f5faff; text-align:center; font-size: 95%; line-height: 1.5em&quot;
|-
| style=&quot;background: #cedff2; padding: 0.3em; text-align:center;&quot; |School Prayer
|-
|style=&quot;padding: 0.3em; &quot;|
O God, Our Heavenly Father,;
from whom cometh every good and perfect gift,;
we beseech thee to bestow thy blessings upon our school,;
and give to all that work here the true love of knowledge;
which makes all study a discovery and a joy.;
May thy spirit of loyalty and devotion bind us all more closely together;
that we may labour not for our own advantage but for the common good.;
May thy wisdom guide and prosper our work and games,;
that we may grow in the love of all that is true and honest;
and of good report. And when we go out into the world;
may we carry with us our ideals of reverence, wisdom and service,;
which thou dost give us in thy Son,;
Jesus Christ our Lord.;
Amen.;;
|-
|}
The school crest was adopted at a College Council meeting on 23 August 1888. It now forms the badge worn on the school uniform. The College Council decided to use the same crest as that used by the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales, but with minor modifications.;

The Church's crest consisted of a shield with the words ''Nec Tamen Consumebatur'' (translated from Latin as &quot;And yet it was not consumed&quot;);; surrounding it. This shield featured the stars of the Southern Cross, a burning bush, and in outline, a Latin cross. At the base were the floral emblems of Scotland, England and Ireland. Surrounding the shield was a border with the words &quot;Presbyterian Church of New South Wales&quot;, with a Star of David placed on top. Behind both shield and borders was the cross of St. Andrew in blue.; 
Collectable School Cigarette card featuring the P.L.C colours &amp; crest, c. 1910's 
The School modified the crest by changing the words &quot;Presbyterian Church of New South Wales&quot; to &quot;Presbyterian Ladies' College, Sydney&quot;, placing a Maltese cross at the top of the shield and inserting the School motto ''Sancte Sapienter''. This motto had been adopted by the school on 23 August 1888 and although no translation was given of the Latin, it may be loosely translated to &quot;be holy wisely&quot; or &quot;holy, wisely&quot;.; 

At Federation in 1901, Presbyterian churches of the various Australian states also federated. The newly formed Presbyterian Church of Australia adopted the N.S.W crest, subsequently changing &quot;New South Wales&quot; to &quot;Australia&quot;. In 1939 the General Assembly of Australia adopted a new crest: the star of David disappeared, the Latin cross was added and the floral emblems were redrawn with the thistle in centre position. These changes account for the differences between the school's and the Church's crest today.;

School badge
The school's highly symbolic badge was inspired by the first Principal, Dr. Marden and designed by the first art teacher, Mr. J.A. Bennett in 1888. The maiden on the lion represents Knowledge, which is crowned by a tower representing the home, and holding a trident representing Sovereignty. A laurel wreath represents the victory of true womanhood, whose crown is the home, over force. The sun symbolises light and energy, while the crescent moon stands for youth. The words &quot;Presbyterian Ladies' College, Sydney&quot; surround the badge.; 
PLC Sydney school badge
The motto ''All'Ultimo Lavoro'' comes from Dante and has variously been translated as: &quot;for the crowning task&quot;, &quot;strive for the highest&quot;, &quot;the utmost for the highest&quot;, or &quot;I work for the highest&quot;.; 
 
The badge is reproduced in the leadlight over the front door of the original house, &quot;Shubra Hall&quot;.;
It may also be found on the recently opened &quot;Ex-Students pathway&quot;. 
 
The school badge was traditionally worn as part of the uniform on the tam-o-shanter, until it was phased out in 1995. The badge is currently not worn by most students, partially due to its adoption by Pymble Ladies' College as their school crest in 1977. It was however reintroduced in 2003 as an addition to the Beret of the P.L.C Pipes and Drums uniform.
The badge is also used by the college's ex-student's union as it has since 1905, with the addition of the words &quot;Ex-students Union&quot; below.

College tartan
The school has adopted as its school and Pipes and Drums uniform the Black Watch Tartan of the Royal Highland Regiment. P.L.C was granted permission to wear the tartan after its brother school, The Scots College, were issued a royal decree allowing them to use Black Watch as their Pipes &amp; Drums and Cadets uniform. 

This tartan was carefully chosen by the school, as the 1958 ''Aurora Australis'' (the school yearbook) explained: ;}} 

Uniform
{|style=&quot;padding: 0.3em; float:right; margin-left:15px; border: 1px solid #B8C7D9; background:#f5faff; text-align:center; font-size: 95%; line-height: 1.5em&quot;
|-
| style=&quot;background: #cedff2; padding: 0.3em; text-align:center;&quot; |School Hymn
|-
|style=&quot;padding: 0.3em; text-align:center;&quot;| The Golden Hope;''Written 1893 by Dr. William Walsham How;To the tune of &quot;St. Fulbert&quot;''
|-
|style=&quot;padding: 0.3em; &quot;|
O Jesus, strong and pure and true,;
Before Thy feet we bow;;
The grace of earlier years renew,;
And lead us onward now.;
;
The joyous life that year by year;
Within these walls is stored,;
The golden hope, the gladsome cheer,;
We bring to Thee, O Lord.;
;
Our faith endow with keener powers,;
With warmer glow our love;;
And draw these halting hearts of ours;
From earth to things above.;
;
In paths our bravest ones have trod,;
O make us strong to go,;
That we may give our lives to God,;
In serving man below.;
;
Scorn we the selfish aim or choice,;
And love's high precept keep,;
&quot;Rejoice with those that do rejoice,;
And weep with those that weep&quot;.;
;
So hence shall flow fresh strength and grace,;
As from a full-fed spring,;
To make the world a better place,;
And life a worthier thing.;;;
|-
|}
When the college first opened in 1888, there was no uniform, rather the girls wore long cotton dresses, gloves and hat. The early 20th century saw the introduction of a straw boater, worn with a red and white hat band featuring the college crest with its burning bush woven into it in red. Prefects during this time wore red silk arm-bands embroidered with a gold crest.;; 

The distinctive Black Watch Tartan of the college was introduced in 1918, following the issue of a royal decree. Senior girls wore heavy box-pleated skirts and white blouse's, whilst junior girls wore pinafore dresses. All girls wore a navy blazer and heavy woollen stockings. Prefects at the time also wore a special hat badge with a ring of bright blue enamel. A black felt Breton was introduced for winter use, and no change was made until the introduction of the green beret in 1952.;
 
1966 saw the introduction of the current Year 11 and 12 uniform. This uniform was designed by the senior students of 1965 and consists of a Black Watch kilt, white blouse (short sleeve in summer, long in winter), green blazer, green jumper or vest, black stockings for winter and bottle green knee-high socks for summer, and black leather lace-up shoes. Girls of Scottish origin may wear the kilt pin representing their family or clan name, rather than the standard school pin. A green and Black Watch tam-o-shanter (known as 'the Beret') was also introduced for all grades a few years earlier.; 

1995 saw the phasing out of the school's distinctive 'Beret' as girls found it difficult to wear. This was replaced by the current Panama hat. The Beret was however reintroduced in 2003 as an addition to the Pipes and Drums uniform. 
PLC students in uniform, 1950
The current junior (R-10) uniform was introduced in 1997. In summer, girls are required to wear a Black Watch tunic, short-sleeve white blouse, green blazer with tartan piping, short green socks and black leather shoes. The winter uniform consists of the tunic, long-sleeve white blouse, the blazer, green jumper or vest, Black Watch Tartan tie, Black Watch Tartan scarf and either green knee-high socks or black stockings.;;

School 'pockets' are awarded for student achievements, and are embroidered in red on the pockets of junior blazers (R-10 girls), and white on the left-brest of senior blazers (11-12 girls). Green and Gold striped school blazers are awarded to girls who represent Australia in any event.

Curriculum
The Presbyterian Ladies' College is a comprehensive school with an academic focus in the curriculum, and takes a traditional academic approach designed to prepare students for university.;; The school is registered and accredited with the New South Wales Board of Studies,;; and therefore follows the mandated curriculum for all years.

=Primary=
Students in stages 1 to 3 (Kindergarten to Year 6) partake in classroom programmes based on that mandated by the Board of Studies, with the youngest students also following the Reggio Emilia approach to education. The six Key Learning Areas are studied: English, Mathematics, Human Society and its Environment (HSIE), Science and Technology, Creative Arts, Personal Development, Health and Physical Education (PD/H/PE). Specialist extension courses are offered to selected Year 2 to 6 students with gifts and talents in special areas (SPEC).;

=Secondary=
Stage 4 students (Years 7 and 8) also study a programme mandated by the Board of Studies. Subjects offered by the school for this stage include: English, Mathematics, Science, Geography, History, French, Mandarin, Latin, Japanese, German, Design and Technology, Visual Arts, Music, PDHPE, Computing and Religious Education. The &quot;Excelsior class&quot; is an enrichment programme offered to gifted and talented students in this stage and includes additional classes such as Philosophy and Olympiad activities.;
PLC pupils doing eurythmics, c. 1930's.
In stage 5 (Years 9 and 10), students are prepared for the School Certificate and study a programme which is comprised of two elective courses and Religious Education, as well as the courses mandated by the Board of Studies. The compulsory core subjects are: English, Mathematics, Science, Australian History and Geography and PDHPE. Electives are chosen from Elective History, Elective Geography, French, German, Mandarin, Latin, Japanese, Commerce, Drama, Design and Technology, Textiles and Design, Music, Visual Arts and Physical Activity and Sports Science. 
In Year 10, the Excelsior class begins its study of the 1-Unit HSC course in Studies of Religion.;

In the final school stage (Years 11 and 12) students are prepared for the New South Wales Higher School Certificate (HSC). The curriculum at this stage has a clear university orientation. 
The Board of Studies requires stage 6 students to study a minimum of 12 units in the Preliminary Year and 10 units in their HSC Year (with most subjects worth 2 units). HSC English is compulsory and Standard, Advanced, Extension courses and 2 unit English as a Second Language are offered. Students may then choose from all levels of Mathematics, Senior Science, Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Modern History, Ancient History, Business Studies, Economics, Geography, Legal studies, French, German, Latin, Japanese, Indonesian (Beginners), Mandarin, Design and Technology, Textiles and Design, Food Technology, Visual Arts, Music (Course 1 and 2), Drama and PD/H/PE.;

University entry levels are high following the completion of stage 6. Each year approximately 50% of P.L.C students receive a Universities Admission Index (UAI) over 90.;; In the 2006 Higher School Certificate, a P.L.C student received a perfect score with a UAI of 100,;; and the National Education Directory of Australia named P.L.C the best performing independent school in Sydney's Inner-West.;;

=Special education=
P.L.C also offers a unique special education unit catering to students with mild to moderate intellectual disabilities. The &quot;transition program&quot; was developed in 1992 in response to a decision by academic staff to provide a special-needs stream. Through this unit, up to 20 girls between the ages of 11 and 18 are provided with an individual program incorporating mainstream classes where possible.;;

The senior transition program for older students focuses on the Board of Studies Life Skills program. As part of this program, girls spend time as residential students in the on-campus &quot;Transition House&quot;, learning to self-cater and self-manage. Transition students also run an outdoor cafe as a small business, in order to gain related business skills.;

Co-curriculum
= Sport= 
PLC swimming carnival, 1948
P.L.C Sydney is arguably one of Australia's best girls sporting schools.;;
The college has been a member of the Independent Girls' Schools Sporting Association (IGSSA) since its foundation in 1922,;; and through this association, senior school students compete against 27 other girls' schools in graded weekend sports and carnivals. Sports available to students through IGSSA include Swimming, Diving, Rowing, Cross Country, Athletics, Gymnastics, Softball, Tennis, Basketball, Soccer, Hockey, Netball, Cricket and Water Polo.;; In 2007 P.L.C won three IGSSA carnival premierships, in Diving for the ninth consecutive year, in Swimming,;; and in Gymnastics.;;

Primary school girls also have the opportunity to participate in inter-school sport through P.L.C's membership of the New South Wales branch of the Junior School Heads Association of Australia (JSHAA).;

In addition to that offered by JSHAA and IGSSA, the college also offers sports such as Skiing, Snowboarding, Equestrian and Badminton through other competitions.; Students with special sporting talent are offered a pathway to represent at the highest level available at P.L.C, IGSSA/JSHAA, Combined Independent Schools, state representation at School Sport Australia and Commonwealth and Olympic level.;; 

In September 2007 the college broke the under-19 female Australian record for 24 hour non-stop rowing, with a distance of 337&amp;nbsp;kilometres.;; Also in 2007, P.L.C was named the New South Wales &quot;School Snowsports Club of the Year&quot; by the NSW Snowsports Association,;; and was the overall national winner of the Australian &quot;School Snowsports Club of the Year&quot; at the 2007 Ski and Snowboard Australia Awards.;;

= Ensembles= 
P.L.C Sydney offers musical ensembles to Junior and Senior School students, both selective and non-selective, including several bands, string orchestras, a full school orchestra, chamber music ensembles, choral groups and several smaller instrumental and vocal groups.;;

P.L.C also features the only all-girls Pipes and Drums corps in the state of New South Wales. The Pipes and Drums corps plays an important role in official school functions and traditions, and members have the opportunity to attend eisteddfods and competitions, combine with other schools for performances, perform at community events, and attend camps and musical tours.;

= Debating and public speaking=
Debating and public speaking is considered a strength of P.L.C Sydney and has a long history of achievement. The college has competed in the Independent Schools Debating Association (ISDA) for the last five years;; and has had a long-standing commitment to the Association of Heads of Independent Girls' Schools#Archdale Debating Competition|Archdale Debating Competition, which involves many of Sydney’s girls' schools, with success in both competitions at semi-final and final level,;; and winning the competition in 2006.;;

P.L.C Sydney enters teams into the Junior and Senior sections of the Association of Heads of Independent Girls' Schools (AHIGS) &quot;Association of Heads of Independent Girls' Schools#Festival of Speech|Festival of Speech&quot;, producing the best results of any AHIGS school over the history of the competition, with 10 consecutive wins in the competition's 12 year history. 

Students may also compete in the Macquarie Cup and the Commonwealth Bank Senior Debating, in competition with a range of public, Catholic and independent Schools. The college organises Social Debates with surrounding schools as well as honouring a commitment to a regular competition with Trinity Grammar School with the P.L.C/Trinity Challenge.;

= Aid Projects=
The P.L.C Overseas Aid Fund has been established to enhance the college's work with aid projects in developing countries, and is an important part of the school's Round Square membership.;;

Some current projects include:
*The establishment and on-going management of two kindergartens in East Timor since 2001.;;
*The establishment of the &quot;Adopt a School&quot; programme. This programme was developed and is directed by the Principal, Dr. William McKeith, and matches schools in Australia with schools in Sri Lanka requiring rebuilding following the 2004 Tsunami. P.L.C's school through this programme is &quot;Senehasa Counselling, Training and Rehabilitation Centre for Girls&quot;.;;
*Management and support of Birla Children's Orphanage in Vietnam, this charity is supported by Year 11.

=Exchange Programme=
The Presbyterian Ladies' College, Sydney offers a number of opportunities for students to participate in overseas student exchange programmes, primarily in Year 10. The school is currently involved in exchanges with private school's in Japan, New Zealand, Scotland, Hong Kong, France, Germany, England and South Africa. The school also offers a variety of other cultural, music and sporting exchanges and domestic and overseas tours.;;

P.L.C currently has formal student exchange arrangements with the following schools:
*Badminton School, Bristol, England
*Gymnasium Im Schloss, Wolfenbuttel, Germany
*Herschel Girls School, Cape Town, South Africa 
*Meitoku Gijuku, Japan
*Saint-Vincent Senlis, Paris, France
*St Andrew's College, Christchurch, New Zealand 
*St. George's School, Edinburgh|St George's School, Edinburgh, Scotland
*St. Paul's Co-educational College, Hong Kong;

P.L.C Sydney currently has a 'twin school' arrangement with the Foreign Language Specializing School in Hanoi, Vietnam.
The school is also a strategic partner of the new Vietnam Australia School (VAS) in Hanoi, with Dr. McKeith in the role of VAS Hanoi senior advisor and Chairman of the school board.;;

House system
The house system was established by Dr. John Marden shortly after the opening of the school, and consisted of three houses: East, West and Boarders. In 1924, the senior houses were re-organised, and renamed Kinross, Harper and Ferguson (with Anderson added in 1968), and in 1926, the junior houses were named Vicars and McQueen (with Thompson added in 1937).;;
1979 saw the school move to four houses from primary to secondary, and thus the junior houses Vicars, McQueen and Thompson disappeared.; 
Finally, 1995 saw the introduction of two new houses due to increasing enrolments. These were named Pickard and Wilkie.

The Houses are named after women and men who have made a significant contribution to the life of the College.

;Anderson
Mrs E O Anderson (Gertrude Dunlop) (1885-1985) was the daughter of John S Dunlop (member of the Council 1902-1912) and attended P.L.C from 1898 to 1902. She was a foundation member of the Committee of the Ex-Students' Union in 1906. From 1927 until 1932, she served as President, then as Vice-President or Patroness from 1936. In 1932 she petitioned the Assembly for the regular appointment of women members to the P.L.C Council. Mrs Anderson was a member of the P.L.C Council, serving from 1932 to 1958. She was a generous benefactor to the College all her life. Colour: ;Navy Blue; Mascot: Ant Established: 1968

;Ferguson
Rev. John Ferguson (1852-1925) came from Invercargill, New Zealand, to be minister of St Stephen's Church, Sydney. In 1917, he was the Acting Principal of St Andrew's Theological College at the University of Sydney during Dr Harper's absence overseas. Subsequently, he was appointed Senior Chaplain and became Chairman of P.L.C Council in 1913, and served in this role until 1923. Colour: ;Green; Mascot: Frog Established: 1924

;Harper
Rev. Dr Andrew Harper (1844-1936) was the third Principal of P.L.C Melbourne from 1879 until 1888. He then lectured at Ormond Theological College, Melbourne before coming to Sydney where he was Principal of St Andrew's Theological College in the University of Sydney from 1902 until 1923. He was Chairman of P.L.C Council from 1907 until 1913. He retired to Scotland. Colour: ;Sky Blue; Mascot: Hippo Established: 1924

;Kinross
Rev. Dr John Kinross (1833-1908) was a Presbyterian minister at Kiama, 1858-1875. He then became principal of St Andrew's Theological College at the University of Sydney from 1875 until 1901. He was Chairman of P.L.C Council from 1888 until 1906.;; Colour: ;Gold; Mascot: King (Lion) Established: 1924

;Pickard
Miss Marion Pickard was appointed to the College at Ashfield in June 1888 as a resident teaching governess. She became Lady Superintendent in 1894 and continued until her resignation in 1907. In 1905 Pickard was elected the first president of the Ex-Students' Union. Colour: ;Purple; Mascot: Panther Established: 1995

;Wilkie
Dr Helen Wilkie (1895-1984), Principal of P.L.C Sydney from 1942 to 1946, came from Edinburgh in 1937 to be Headmistress at P.L.C Armidale. On her appointment to Croydon she was almost immediately confronted with the College's takeover by the RAAF and organised the move of the college to several houses at Strathfield. Colour: ;Maroon; Mascot: Wallaby Established: 1995;;

P.L.C Armidale alliance
In late August 2005, due to financial troubles at the Presbyterian Ladies' College, Armidale, it was announced that P.L.C Armidale and P.L.C Sydney would join together to form an alliance. The aim of this alliance is to strengthen P.L.C Armidale through cooperative marketing, a change in management and a stronger financial base. It should also be of benefit to both schools through student exchanges, accommodation for sporting events or excursions, and a 'country or city' option for prospective students.

In the September-October 2005 edition of the Presbyterian Church in New South Wales' ''Church Offices Newsletter'', the Chairman of Trustees, Jeof Falls, announced this alliance between the two schools:
;;}}

Ex-Students' Union
The Ex-Students' Union was inaugurated on the evening of 9 December 1905, when at the invitation of Dr. Marden, several former students discussed the proposal, elected as their President the then Lady Superintendent, Miss Marion Pickard, and formed a committee to produce a constitution. These were confirmed at a General Meeting on Jersey Day 1906, and the committee took office until 1907. 
At its foundation, the main objective of the union was to:;}}

The Union achieved much in its first few years, renting a building in the CBD to serve as a club and committee meeting place, making garments for hospitals, visiting Kindergartens, the YWCA, Home of Peace, Infants' Home and the Royal Institute for Deaf and Blind Children. An Ex-Students' Orchestra and Dramatic Club were formed, and Tennis and Croquet matches were held between current and former pupils.;

In 1916 the Pymble College was opened and its first Ex-Students' expressed an interest in joining the Union. Subsequently, a combined Union was formed, known as &quot;The P.L.C Croydon and Pymble Ex-Students' Union&quot;, and an Ex-Students' prize was established at Pymble on the same conditions as at Croydon.;

One of the Unions' most significant contributions to the school was planned following the death of Dr. Marden in 1924. With the desire to provide Marden with a &quot;fitting and lasting memorial&quot;, it was decided that a library, to be called the &quot;John Marden Memorial Library&quot;, should be built at the Croydon College. This building was opened by Mrs. Marden in 1927 and although no longer suitable as a library due its size, remains a treasured part of the school.;

In 1929, it was proposed that &quot;Pymble students should form a separate Union&quot; and that an equitable division of Union funds should be undertaken. This explains the two separate groups that exist today, however it is still not uncommon for Pymble students to attend Croydon reunions and events, particularly those in regional areas or interstate.;

= Notable alumnae=
Alumnae of the Presbyterian Ladies' College, Sydney are commonly referred to as P.L.C Old Girls, and may elect to join the schools alumni association, the P.L.C Ex-Students' Union. For a list of notable P.L.C Old Girls, see ''List of Old Girls of PLC Sydney''.

Associated schools
There are three other Presbyterian schools in the state of New South Wales:
*P.L.C's brother school, The Scots College in Bellevue Hill.
*P.L.C's sister school, The Presbyterian Ladies' College, Armidale. Sydney and Armidale &quot;P.L.C's&quot; are both overseen by Dr. McKeith (Executive principal of Armidale, Principal of Sydney), and the Sydney College Council.
*The Scots School, Bathurst

Formerly a school of the Presbyterian Church, Pymble Ladies' College is P.L.C's 'daughter school' in Pymble.

Notes
*Who's Who of girls' school rankings: 1.PLC Melbourne, 2.SCEGGS Darlinghurst, 3.MLC Melbourne, 4.PLC Sydney, 5.Melbourne Girls Grammar School, 6.Mac.Robertson Girls' High School, 7.North Sydney Girls High School, 8.Sydney Girls High School, 9.MLC Sydney, 10.University High School, Melbourne 
*Branxton served as a co-educational prep school for the college until 1996, when it was sold to Meriden School and its name reverted back to &quot;Lingwood&quot;.
*Hymn originally written for Marlborough College to celebrate its jubilee in 1893. Thought to have been adopted by P.L.C c. 1930.
*The proposal to build a Chapel was abandoned in 1907, and subsequently a Chapel has never been built at P.L.C.

References


Further reading
* McFarlane, J.D. 1988. ''The Golden Hope: Presbyterian Ladies' College, 1888-1988''. P.L.C Council, Presbyterian Ladies' College, Sydney. ISBN 0-9597340-1-5.
*''Diamond Jubilee Year Book''. P.L.C Croydon, 1948. 
*Menzies, W. 1989. ''Strive to the utmost : a historical account of the occupation of the Presbyterian Ladies' College, Croydon by the Royal Australian Air Force during the World War II''. Presbyterian Ladies' College, Sydney, Croydon N.S.W.
*Coleman, M. 1991. ''This is Pymble College: The First 75 years, 1916-1991''. Pymble Ladies' College. 
*McFarlane, J.D. 1970, ''A Brief History of P.L.C Goulburn, 1921-1970''. Goulburn, Goulburn Post.
*Butt, M.F. 1978. ''Presbyterian Ladies' College, Orange - A Journal''. Orange, G.H Craig.
* Fitzpatrick, K. 1975. ''PLC Melbourne: The First Century 1875-1975''. Burwood, The Presbyterian Ladies College.
* Reid, M.O. 1960. ''The Ladies Came to Stay: A Study of the Education of Girls at the Presbyterian Ladies' College, Melbourne 1875-1960''. Melbourne, Council of the College. 

See also
*List of non-government schools in New South Wales
*List of boarding schools
*List of pipe bands
*Head of the River (New South Wales)

External links
* [http://www.plc.nsw.edu.au/ Presbyterian Ladies' College, Sydney website]
* [http://www.plc.nsw.edu.au/public/Sport/spindex.html PLC Sydney Sport website]
* [http://www.plcarmidale.nsw.edu.au/ Presbyterian Ladies' College, Armidale website]
* [http://www.pcnsw.org.au/ Presbyterian Church of Australia in NSW]
* [http://www.ahigs.nsw.edu.au/ The Association of Heads of Independent Girls' Schools]
* [http://www.jshaa.asn.au Junior School Heads Association of Australia]





Category:Girls schools in Australia
Category:Educational institutions established in 1888
Category:Presbyterian schools
Category:Boarding schools in New South Wales
Category:Private schools in New South Wales
Category:Round Square schools
Category:Schools in Sydney
Category:Association of Heads of Independent Girls' Schools
Category:RAAF radar and surveillance units
Category:Junior School Heads Association of Australia Member Schools
Category:Former students of PLC Sydney|*
Category:High schools in New South Wales
Category:Primary schools in Australia