Square Enix's and Disney's ''Kingdom Hearts'' series of video games takes place in an unnamed outer space-like fictional universe with numerous self-contained worlds to explore over the course of play. Many of these worlds are based on animated Disney movies, though ''Kingdom Hearts II'' introduced some worlds based on live action Disney films. In addition to the Disney worlds, Square included original worlds over the course of the series. The concept of the games and setting was developed by Tetsuya Nomura, the series' director. The series centers around the main character Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Sora|Sora's search for his friends and his encounters with Disney and Final Fantasy characters on their worlds. Sora's first journey takes him through each world to lock their keyholes and prevent the #Heartless and Nobody|Heartless from destroying them. On Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories|his trip through Castle Oblivion, he revisits memory based versions of many of these worlds. In ''Kingdom Hearts II'', Sora helps the residents of these worlds again in search of his friend Riku. The ''Kingdom Hearts'' games have been both critically acclaimed and commercially successful. The worlds used in the games have received praise from reviewers.


Concept and design
The universe of ''Kingdom Hearts'' is a collection of various levels, referred to as &quot;worlds&quot;, that the player progresses through. Each world varies in appearance and setting, depending on the Disney world that it is based on. The graphics of the world and characters were meant to resemble the artwork style of the environments and characters from their respective Disney film. Each Disney world is inhabited by characters from their respective Disney film; Hercules and Philoctetes inhabit Olympus Coliseum, and Aladdin, Princess Jasmine, and the Magic Carpet inhabit Agrabah.;; Each world is also disconnected from the others and exists separately. With a few exceptions, most characters in the worlds are unaware of the existence of the other worlds. Worlds are made up of interconnected field maps where battles and events take place. Players travel from one world to another via a Gummi Ship.;; The worlds created specifically for the game mirror the overall appearance of the other worlds and feature either new characters or characters from several ''Final Fantasy'' games.

Though Disney gave director Tetsuya Nomura freedom in the characters and worlds used for the games, he and his staff tried to stay within the established roles of characters and boundaries of the worlds.;; Nomura stated that managing and keeping multiple worlds was problematic.;; After determining the number of worlds in the universe, Nomura then picked the worlds he felt would fit into the scenario. The list was then evaluated by his team and then finally by Disney representatives.;; Nomura also tried to keep the same number of worlds in each game;; and made an effort to minimize any overlap in the overall look and feel of each world. He and his staff accomplished this by categorizing various Disney worlds by appearance and setting. For example, the Jungle Book was considered for the first game, but was omitted due to the similarity between it and the Deep Jungle from Tarzan.;;; They also tried to take into account worlds with Disney characters that would be interesting.;; The inclusion of specific Final Fantasy characters was based on the opinions of both fans and staff.;; Initially, Nomura was hesitant to use characters he did not design, because he was unfamiliar with the background work of those characters.;; For ''Kingdom Hearts II'', he changed his mind after receiving pressure from his staff.;

Cosmology
In the fictional universe of the ''Kingdom Hearts'' series, beings are composed of three parts: the body, the soul, and the heart. The body is a vessel for the heart and soul, and the soul gives life.;Secret Ansem Report #4: Three elements combine to create a life: a heart, a soul, and a body. [...] When the soul leaves the body, its vessel, life gives way to death ; The heart gives a being emotion, light, and darkness. Seven maidens, called the &quot;Princesses of Heart&quot;, possess no darkness in their hearts. Worlds also possess hearts,;Ansem's Report 10: Just as people have hearts, so do worlds. The same can be said of stars in the night sky. And deep within each world lies a door to its heart. ; and all hearts originate from Kingdom Hearts. Beings are corrupted when darkness takes their heart, producing the Heartless from their hearts and sometimes producing a Organization XIII#Nobody|Nobody from the remaining body and soul. Heartless act as forces of darkness, seeking to consume more hearts, including those of worlds. The &quot;heart of all worlds&quot; and the source of hearts is Kingdom Hearts. An object of immense power, it is desired by many forces of darkness and a path to it is opened by the unison of the Princesses of Heart. Nomura tried to convey a common theme of &quot;hearts&quot; and the strengths and connections of the heart in all three of the Square Enix games.;

The fictional universe of the ''Kingdom Hearts'' series is divided into planes of existence called &quot;realms&quot;. Most of the series takes place in the &quot;realm of light&quot;. Opposite the realm of light is the &quot;realm of darkness&quot;, where Kingdom Hearts resides. There is also an &quot;in-between realm&quot;, a plane where Nobodies, as well as the worlds they reside in, come into existence. There are four worlds that are currently known to be found exclusively within this &quot;in-between realm&quot;.;; Each world found within the in-between plane are tied more closely to either the realm of light or the realm of darkness by varying degrees. As well as these known realms, Ansem the Wise was banished to a &quot;realm of nothingness&quot;,;Secret Ansem Report #3: I, too, have had everything taken away from me, bashed to a hollow realm of nothingness. ; which he described as a realm &quot;where all existence has been disintegrated&quot;.;''Secret Ansem Report #5: In this realm, where all existence has been disintegrated, I have just barely managed to preserve my sense of self by continuing to think and to write. ;

=Heartless and Nobody=
A &quot;Shadow&quot; Heartless, the most common type of Heartless
 are hearts corrupted by darkness and without a body or a soul. They serve as most of the battles and challenges that the player must go through in the ''Kingdom Hearts'' games. They come in a large variety of types, categorized by being Pureblood or Emblem, both reproducing by taking more hearts and transforming them into other Heartless. Emblem Heartless were artificially created and are labeled with a heart symbol. Pureblood Heartless are black shadow creatures with bright yellow eyes. The Heartless obey those with the will to control them.;Saïx: The Heartless ally with whoever's the strongest. ; However, in worlds too close to darkness, the Heartless get stronger and become uncontrollable. The Heartless' method of entering worlds is to use the corridors of darkness, an unpredictable pathway that interlinks many worlds.;Yen Sid: The Heartless and the Nobodies will be using their own paths: Corridors of darkness, to travel from world to world. They may be attempting to link these dark pathways to the gates between the worlds. ;

A &quot;Dusk&quot; Nobody, the most common type of Nobody
 are creatures without hearts. They are leftovers &quot;born&quot; in the in-between realm, and exist as the body and soul of people who lost their hearts to darkness.;Secret Ansem Report #7: In search of a place to proceed with my research and planning away from prying eyes, I found myself in &quot;Twilight Town.&quot; […] When a Heartless is born, the body and soul left behind are reborn into this world as a different being. ; As they lack hearts to possess light or darkness,;Xemnas: Then allow me another question. You accept darkness, yet choose to live in the light. So why is it that you loathe us who teeter on the edge of nothing? We who were turned away by both light and dark---never given a choice? ; they are nothing, according to the cosmology of the ''Kingdom Hearts'' universe,;Yen Sid: An empty vessel whose heart has been stolen away… A spirit that goes on even as its body fades from existence---for you see, Nobodies do not truly exist at all. ; but still exist. Unlike Heartless, Nobodies are able to attack with definite planning.;Yen Sid: While Heartless act on instinct, Nobodies function in a higher manner. They can think and plan. ; Dusk is the most common type of Nobody. Other Nobodies include Twilight Thorn, Creeper, Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Naminé|Naminé, and multiple kinds of Nobody ships. The members of Organization XIII, being the most powerful Nobodies because of the strong hearts they had when they were &quot;whole,&quot; kept human form while weaker ones assumed malformed, inhuman forms.;Secret Ansem Report #7: A great number of Nobodies have lost human form, as have the Heartless. Yet the Nobody born of someone with a strong heart retains its shape, with but the faintest visible changes. ; Most of the members of the Organization tend to control one type of Nobody, usually suited to their fighting style.;;

=Keyblade=
Theis a key-shaped weapon with the power to combat darkness and free hearts from the Heartless.;Saïx: Pitiful Heartless, mindlessly collecting hearts. It is unknown where the Keyblade came from.And yet they know not the true power of what they hold.The rage of the Keyblade releases those hearts. ; It also has the ability to lock and unlock all manner of doors and keyholes.;Hades: Let me see if I got this right... That brat's Keyblade works on any lock? / Pete: That's right. ; The Keyblade chooses its wielder and will appear in that person's hand when summoned. Another important power is that it can lock the &quot;heart&quot; of a world, preventing it from being destroyed by Heartless. In ''Kingdom Hearts II'', it can also unlock the pathways between worlds that were closed after the events of the first game.;Yen Sid: Because of your previous endeavors, the worlds have returned to their original states. That means the pathways between them have disappeared. / Donald: How do we get around? / Yen Sid: Do not fear. If what the King suspected proves true, the worlds have prepared new pathways along which you may travel. These pathways may be utilized by unlocking special gates. How these gates are opened, I'm afraid I do not know... However, the Keyblade will serve as your guide. When a beam of light radiates from the Keyblade, return to the Gummi Ship. ; There are different Keyblades, possessed byvarious characters in the ''Kingdom Hearts'' series. There was, at one point, an artificial Keyblade made by the hearts of six of the Princesses of Heart, which was destroyed by Sora.

Travel
In the ''Kingdom Hearts'' universe, travel between worlds is normally not possible. Worlds are protected from extraterrestrial interference by an invisible shell.;;Yuffie: Before all this, you didn’t know about the other worlds, right? / Aerith: Because every world was isolated. Impassable walls divided them. ; When the heart of a world is opened, the shell breaks apart, appearing as a meteor shower.;;Ansem's Report 5: Suddenly, a strange door appeared. I'd never known of its existence. It had a large keyhole, but didn't seem to be locked. So I opened the
door. What I saw on the other side mystified me. What was that powerful mass of energy. That night I observed a great meteor shower in the sky.; Fragments from the wall are able to be constructed into &quot;Gummi Ships&quot;, which serve as the main mode of travel between the various worlds. Gummi Ships are constructed from &quot;Gummi blocks&quot; and can be shaped into any structure; the origin of the Gummi Ship material allows for travel to other worlds.;;Ansem's Report 9: Simple astonishing! Today I had a guest from another world. He is a king, and his vessel is built of the material that composed the meteors. He called the pieces &quot;Gummi blocks.&quot; It seemed that my opening the door has opened a path to interworld travel. ; Gummi blocks can serve different functions, from navigation to offense and defense.;;; Another method to travel between worlds are the &quot;corridors of darkness&quot;, interdimensional pathways which erode the user's heart with darkness.; These pathways are normally used by Heartless and Nobodies,; but have been used by other characters in the series.;

Worlds
;
=Destiny Islands=
A portion of the Destiny Islands, where the children play
The Destiny Islands are featured in all three of the main ''Kingdom Hearts'' games, though playable only briefly in ''Kingdom Hearts'' and ''Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories''. They form an original world created for the ''Kingdom Hearts'' series. Some of the main characters of the series reside here; Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Sora|Sora, Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Riku|Riku, Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Kairi|Kairi. Other characters include Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Destiny Islands|Tidus, Wakka, and Selphie, which were originally Final Fantasy characters. The world is enveloped by the darkness in the beginning of ''Kingdom Hearts'', but is restored after the sealing of the door to Kingdom Hearts at the end. 

The islands are an archipelago that consists of several land masses. Close enough to the main islands to be reached by small boats is an island that several of the character visit for recreation. The keyhole of the islands is located here in a small cave which Riku discovered as a boy. The main island is a regular town with a school. A superstition of the island is the power of the paopu fruit which is said to bind together the destinies of any two people who share one.;Sora: A paopu fruit... / Riku: If two people share one, their destinies become intertwined. They’ll remain a part of each other’s lives no matter what. C’mon, I know you want to try it. ;

=Disney Castle=
Disney Castle
Disney Castle is the home to many classic Disney characters;; including Characters of Kingdom Hearts#King Mickey|Mickey, Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Donald Duck|Donald and Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Goofy|Goofy. It is featured in ''Kingdom Hearts'' and ''Kingdom Hearts II'', though it is not accessible in the first game. Disney Castle is ruled by King Mickey, and his queen, Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Disney Castle|Minnie Mouse. King Mickey has been absent for more than a year, having left without warning at the outset of the first wave of the Heartless. The world is protected by the Cornerstone of Light, a magical artifact that prevents darkness and the Heartless from entering the world.;Minnie: The room below is called the 'Hall of the Cornerstone.' Our castle has always been safe from worlds that are evil...thanks to the Cornerstone of Light which we keep down there. ; In ''Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix'', a portal was added in this world. The portal leads to battle with Terra, a Keyblade-wielding knight that was featured in the unlockable trailers of ''Kingdom Hearts II''. 

Timeless River
Based on Steamboat Willie and other early Disney cartoons of that era, Timeless River is the &quot;past&quot; of Disney Castle, shortly before it was built.;Goofy: Let's see...if that door's connected to the past... / Donald: No, no, no! It comes here. / Sora: Huh? / Goofy: Then that means we're in the past! ; This world is accessed via the door Merlin created in the Hall of the Cornerstone chamber in ''Kingdom Hearts II''.;Sora: What's that? / Merlin: My boy, that is a gateway to a special world. Someone in that world is responsible for what's going on in this castle. Of that, I'm certain. ; The world is portrayed in black and white. Nomura had intended it to be this way from the beginning of development.;; The world has many throwback effects including intentionally poor sound quality to imitate old cartoons. In this grayscale world, Sora's character model is simplified to the style of early cartoons, while Goofy and Donald Duck revert to their original designs from when they first appeared in Disney cartoons. Past versions of many Disney characters also appear including Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Pete|Pete and King Mickey, who Pete refers to as the &quot;boat-boy king&quot;, a reference to his previous employment on Pete's steamboat. Timeless River also contains reenactments of some popular Mickey Mouse cartoons with locations such as Lilliput and Scene of the Fire.

=Traverse Town=
Second District of Traverse Town
Traverse Town is an original world that is featured in ''Kingdom Hearts'' and ''Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories''. It acts as a hub of sorts for Sora during his journey. Its architecture is reminiscent of the High Victorian style popular in England during the 19th century. It serves as a home for people who manage to escape the destruction of their own worlds by unknowingly drifting through &quot;corridors of darkness&quot;.

Traverse Town is separated into three major districts. The First District is generally devoid of Heartless and houses various shops. The Second District contains the bell tower, a gizmo shop, and a small hotel. The world's keyhole is located in the fountain in this district. It also has the entrance to the Dalmatians' house. The Third District is a plaza that has been overrun with Heartless. This district leads to a guarded alcove where Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Other characters|Merlin lives. It also is where Leon and his allies have their secret hideout. Aside from these areas, Traverse Town also has a sewer system where Leon practices his swordplay and a back alley behind the hotel.

=Wonderland=
Wonderland, based on Disney's thirteenth animated feature, ''Alice in Wonderland'', is featured in ''Kingdom Hearts'' and ''Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories'' as one of the first worlds visited on Sora's journey. Its colorful inhabitants seem to speak in riddles and code. Wonderland is ruled by the despotic Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Wonderland|Queen of Hearts. The most dominant feature of Wonderland's entrance is the Bizarre Room. Many of the items here can be pushed flat into the walls and strange potions here can change Sora's size. The next area is the Queen's Castle where most of her courtly functions are carried out, a verdant hedge maze surrounds this area. Connected to the courtyard is the Lotus Forest, which leads to the Tea Party Garden. Throughout the world are hidden entrances to the Bizarre Room which have effects on the direction of its gravity.

=Olympus Coliseum=
Olympus Coliseum is featured in all three of the main ''Kingdom Hearts'' games. It is based on Disney's thirty-fifth animated feature, ''Hercules''. The Coliseum is protected by Hercules and antagonized by Hades. Sora is able to train here and can compete in various tournaments. Olympus Coliseum is one of the smallest worlds in the first ''Kingdom Hearts'', consisting of only the main entrance, a lobby and the coliseum itself. Because of the popularity of Hades, the Underworld was added to the sequel.;; In ''Kingdom Hearts II'', Hades opens a portal to the Underworld near the exit of the Coliseum. The Underworld consists of its own &quot;lobby&quot; which is one boat ride across the river Styx to the Underdrome, the Underworld's equivalent to the Coliseum, the Lost Road to the Lock and the Cave of the Dead which leads to Hades' Chamber. All of these Underworld areas are infested with Heartless, as well as mysterious white puffs of smoke.

=Deep Jungle=
Deep Jungle is based on Disney's thirty-seventh animated feature, ''Tarzan'',; and is only featured in the first ''Kingdom Hearts'' game. It is a lush tropical forest of diverse animals and exotic plants. The primary inhabitants of this world are gorillas, who live in the secretive corners of the jungle and resist intrusion. An exploratory party has arrived to study them but its guide, Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Deep Jungle|Clayton, has other plans. The jungle is also home to hippos and other jungle creatures, including the Heartless' mimicry of the local animals. Traveling in this world is done by climbing up trees and jumping onto vines. Much of the world is covered with dense jungle but some areas have signs of civilized inhabitance. There is an abandoned treehouse near the canopy that contains the remains of a previous visitor to the world. Also, the camp set up by Clayton contains many conveniences including stoves and slide projectors. The Bamboo Thicket near the camp ultimately leads to the Waterfall Cave, a secluded place that hides the world's keyhole.

=Agrabah=
Agrabah is an arid desert city featured in all three of the main ''Kingdom Hearts'' games. It is based on the fictional city of Disney's thirty-first animated feature, ''Aladdin''. Agrabah's hot climate disguises a world of intrigue, both magical and political, as an evil sorcerer schemes to usurp the throne from the sultan of the realm. Little is as it seems in this world as it gets turned upside down through the antics of a certain Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Agrabah|genie. The city of Agrabah is primarily made of adobe buildings though the palace appears to be carved from marble. In the first game, there are only two small blocks for the marketplace, but the city area was expanded in ''Kingdom Hearts II''. Just outside the city walls is a desert area. The desert itself leads to the Cave of Wonders and the ruins of an ancient civilization.

=Monstro=
Inside Monstro
Monstro is an enormous whale from Disney's second animated feature, ''Pinocchio''; and is featured in ''Kingdom Hearts'' and ''Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories''. Monstro is not a world unto himself and thus has no keyhole. Rather, his belly is large enough to serve as a substitute world, filled with luminescent acid, blubber, and Heartless. Monstro swims through the dimensional drift between worlds as if it were water, attacking and swallowing any vessel that passes his way. Monstro escaped from the world of Characters of Kingdom Hearts##Monstro|Geppetto and Characters of Kingdom Hearts##Monstro|Pinocchio just before it was destroyed by the Heartless. Geppetto finds himself inside Monstro's belly while searching for his &quot;son,&quot; Pinocchio. Monstro's anatomically disoriented insides consist of two major parts. His enormous mouth contains many of the ships he has swallowed over the years, including Geppetto's. His throat leads to his Heartless-filled intestines, which are a sickly purple color with vessels and valves separating the body cavities.

=100 Acre Wood=
The 100 Acre Wood is an optional world based on the fictional locale of author A. A. Milne and Disney's 22nd animated feature, ''The Many Adventures of Winnie the Pooh''.; The world takes the form of a magical book located in Merlin's house. As Sora collects Torn Pages, new areas of the 100 Acre Wood become available as the story is retold. When Sora &quot;enters the book&quot;, he lands on a version of the flat map of the 100 Acre Wood featured in many Pooh books. Classic locations such as Pooh's and Piglet's House appear as well as the Muddy Path and Spooky Cave. In each location is usually a minigame with prizes which help Sora on his journey.

The book is first given to Sora by Cid near the beginning of ''Kingdom Hearts'' and he collects Torn Pages throughout the game until he finds and seals the 100 Acre Wood's keyhole.;Merlin: Oh, that book... So, Cid asked you to bring this. Thank you. You wish to know what kind of book it is? I don’t even know, myself. In fact, it’s not mine. Somehow it found its way into my bag one day. It was such a curious book, I asked Cid to repair it for me. Well, I guess I’ll put it here somewhere, for now. This book holds a great secret. The missing pages will unlock it. I’ll leave the book over there. Do look at it whenever you like. My best regards to Cid for repairing it for me. Oh, and about that stone of yours... You should ask the Fairy Godmother about that. ; Along the way, he makes friends with each of the Wood's inhabitants, particularly Characters of Kingdom Hearts#100 Acre Wood|Winnie the Pooh, with whom he plays a Christopher Robin-like role. 100 Acre Wood appeared again as a recreated world in ''Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories''. In ''Kingdom Hearts II'', Merlin moves to Hollow Bastion and takes the book with him. When Sora returns, he excitedly enters the book to check up on his friends. While he is greeting Pooh, he is suddenly ejected from the book as the Heartless try to steal it. During the battle to recover the book, it is damaged. Upon return, Sora finds Pooh with severe amnesia, unable to remember him. Sora then continues to find Torn Pages which slowly restore Pooh's memory.;Sora: Well... Pooh seems to have forgotten all about me. And not just me---all his other friends, too. / Merlin: I was afraid of that... I suspect it has something to do with those pages the Heartless stole. You'll have to collect the torn pages and repair the book to put things right. ; Shortly after fully repairing the book, Sora admits that he has to leave again but reassures Pooh that they will always be in each other's hearts.

=Atlantica=
Atlantica, based on Disney's 28th animated feature, ''The Little Mermaid'',; is an underwater kingdom featured in all three of the main ''Kingdom Hearts'' games. Ruled by Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Atlantica|King Triton and his powerful magic trident, its inhabitants are mermaids and sea creatures. While here, Donald uses his magic to transform the main characters in order blend into the environment.;Donald: Okay, guys. Prepare for landing. / Sora: Land where? In the sea? We’ll drown! / Donald: Not with my magic, we won’t. Just leave it to me. ; Sora's legs become a dolphin's tail, Donald's legs become octopus tentacles and Goofy's body becomes that of a sea turtle.;; In ''Kingdom Hearts II'', there is no battling in Atlantica and it featured minimal exploration. The main form of gameplay was an interactive rhythm game.;

The main city of Atlantica is the only &quot;constructed&quot; area, made of what appears to be coral and other underwater vegetation. King Triton's chamber can be found here. Outside the city is the Undersea Gorge, which is a sort of hub to other areas. Here can be found Ariel's Grotto, a secret place where Princess Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Atlantica|Ariel stores her human artifacts. Also, a path from here leads to a rotting sunken ship that has become the home to many sea creatures. A more sinister area of the sea can be accessed from here: the Den of Tides and the sea witch Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Atlantica|Ursula's lair.

=Halloween Town=
Halloween Town is an eternally dark village featured in all three of the main ''Kingdom Hearts'' games. It is based on Tim Burton's ''The Nightmare Before Christmas'', a stop motion animated film released by Touchstone Pictures. The residents of Halloween Town are obsessed with their eponymous holiday and each year, they seek to outdo the last year's celebration. Though it has a Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Halloween Town|mayor, the de facto leader of Halloween Town is the Pumpkin King, Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Halloween Town|Jack Skellington. Using Donald's magic, Sora, Donald and Goofy disguise themselves as spooky characters to blend in with the Halloween Town folk.;Goofy: This sure is a spooky place. I’ll bet the people here are scary-lookin’ too. / Donald: Don’t worry. We look spooky, too. If they scare us, we’ll scare them right back! ;

Halloween Town's nexus is Guillotine Square, which has entrances to Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Halloween Town|Dr. Finklestein's lab, Jack Skellington's house and the Graveyard. The Graveyard has been overrun by Halloween-themed Heartless and leads to Moonlight Hill. A secret switch in Moonlight Hill allows access to Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Halloween Town|Oogie Boogie's Manor. The back of the Graveyard also houses a forest called the Hinterlands. Here, several trees with strange symbols lead to other holiday-themed towns. The most prominent is Christmas Town, where Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Halloween Town|Santa Claus lives and has his workshop. In the Final Mix version of ''Kingdom Hearts II'', Sora's Halloween outfit is replaced by a Christmas outfit. It is a mixture of both Christmas and Halloween themes. Donald and Goofy also receive new Christmas outfits. Like the mask of his Halloween outfit, the Santa hat of his Christmas outfit changes when activating a Drive Form.

=Neverland=
;
Neverland is a world featured in ''Kingdom Hearts'' and ''Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories''. It is based on locations from Disney's fourteenth animated feature, ''Peter Pan'' and author J. M. Barrie's fictional island. Although the world is officially called &quot;Neverland&quot;, there are no signs of the timeless island where people do not age. Instead, it primarily consists of Captain Hook's ship, the cabins and decks therein. Also accessible is a large clock tower which Wendy refers to as &quot;Big Ben&quot;. Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Neveland|Peter Pan sneaks aboard Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Neverland|Captain Hook's ship in order to save his friend, Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Neverland|Wendy, whom Captain Hook had captured, believing her to be a Princess of Heart.

=Hollow Bastion=
The castle in Hollow Bastion
Hollow Bastion is an original world created for the ''Kingdom Hearts'' series which serves as the home to many ''Final Fantasy'' characters in the series. It is featured in all three of the main ''Kingdom Hearts'' games, and served as the hub world of ''Kingdom Hearts II'', similar to how Traverse Town did in the first.;; The gathering of the various Final Fantasy characters and the overall look of Hollow Bastion was changed for the third installment in order to help with the progression of the story.;

Hollow Bastion is dominated by a castle which, now derelict, once was the world's seat of power. Underneath the castle entrance are the Waterways which provide plumbing throughout the castle. A library is here, containing knowledge collected by its former scientists. Aside from the castle itself, there is a town at its foot which is the base of operations for the Hollow Bastion Restoration Committee in ''Kingdom Hearts II''.;Yuffie: Everybody's working on stuff over at Merlin's house. C'mon! / ... / Meet the Hollow Bastion Restoration Committee! ; A previously unknown entrance here leads to Ansem's Study and his computer room.

Hollow Bastion was once a peaceful kingdom called the Radiant Garden,;Tron: You can see the town back when it was first built. / Leon: That's right... I remember now. / Cid: Just like the old days... / Merlin: Hmm... I'd be fascinated to ascertain as to when the town got such a dreadful name as Hollow Bastion! / Aerith: You know, this town had another name once. / Sora: Hm? / Aerith: Radiant Garden. ; ruled by Ansem the Wise. In his thirst for knowledge, he began studying the darkness in people's hearts, with six apprentices, including Xehanort. Ansem grew wary of the experiments and stopped them. Unknown to him, his apprentices continued his work, producing the Heartless from hearts that were overwhelmed by darkness. A chain of events led to Ansem the Wise being banished, Xehanort splitting into two beings, and the world overwhelmed by darkness. Empty, the castle was later adopted by Maleficent as a headquarters.

Space Paranoids
Space Paranoids is a world inspired by the 1982 live-action science fiction cult film, ''Tron''. Sora, Donald, and Goofy get immersed into a computer world to find clues regarding the past of Hollow Bastion and a caption they found behind Xehanort's portrait in Ansem's Study saying ''Door To Darkness'' a.k.a. ''D.T.D'', fighting alongside Tron to defeat the evil MCP and its equally villainous commander, Sark. There is also a Light Cycle mini-game which strongly deviates from the original game. Nomura included this mini-game because he knew people associated the Light Cycles with Tron.;

Space Paranoids is only playable in ''Kingdom Hearts II''. Tron at one point mentions that Space Paranoids was copied from an existing world designed by ENCOM, the company from the original film. It can be assumed that the Space Paranoids in ''Kingdom Hearts II'' exists alongside the original (though Tron said that the original was deleted).;Tron: You're inside a mainframe computer system. / Sora: A what system? / Tron: A computer system---for processing data. This system is a copy of one created by a corporation called ENCOM. The original program was destroyed. ; The term ''Space Paranoids'' comes from one of the games Kevin Flynn created in ''Tron''. Tron can join Sora, Donald and Goofy when they enter into the system. The overall feel of the world was meant to emulate an old computer game. Nomura got the idea to include this world after seeing a Disney employee making a Tron game. Because it was so different from the other worlds, he hoped that it would be enjoyable to players.;

=End of the World=
End of the World
End of the World is the final world in ''Kingdom Hearts''. This world is made out of the worlds that lost their hearts to the Heartless.;Goofy: Gawrsh, is that all that's left of the worlds taken by the Heartless? ; It is also the home of Chernabog, the huge winged demon from the ''Fantasia'' segment &quot;Night on Bald Mountain&quot;. Tetsuya Nomura referenced it as the &quot;#Heartless and Nobody|Nobody&quot; of worlds. The World Terminus is also located here, which gives the Heartless access to the corridors of darkness leading to other worlds.

=Castle Oblivion=
 is a mysterious fortress featured in ''Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories'' and serves as the main setting of the game. The castle is decorated with a rose motif and has twenty five levels; thirteen floors and twelve basements. The lord of the castle is Organization XIII#XI. Marluxia|Marluxia, a member of Organization XIII.;Zexion: That was Marluxia, keeper of this castle. ; This castle is one of the few worlds known to be found in neither the realm of light or the realm of darkness, but is instead found on a plane somewhere in between the two realms. In the balance between light and darkness within this in-between realm, however, Castle Oblivion is more closely tied to the realm of darkness than the realm of light.;

Castle Oblivion is dominated by the use of Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories#Gameplay|cards. When entering the castle, one's memories and abilities are quantified into cards. Castle Oblivion's floors can be transmuted into different forms and layouts through the use of &quot;world cards&quot; derived from one's memories, as well as &quot;map cards&quot; which determine the properties of individual rooms. World cards based on Traverse Town, Wonderland, Olympus Coliseum, Agrabah, Halloween Town, Monstro, Atlantica, Never Land, Hollow Bastion, 100 Acre Wood, Twilight Town, and Destiny Islands have been created from Sora and Riku's memories.;;

=Twilight Town=
Twilight Town's clock tower
Twilight Town was introduced in ''Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories'', in which Sora explored the memories of the other side of his heart. In ''Kingdom Hearts II'', it is a major part in the story where Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Twilight Town|Hayner, Pence, and Olette reside.; ''Kingdom Hearts II''; Piggyback Interactive Limited. September 2006, ISBN 978-1-903511-89-3.; DiZ created a simulation of the town and its people to keep Roxas trapped and away from Organization XIII until Sora's restoration was complete. Roxas is playable only in this world.

Twilight Town is split into two parts, the shopping district and the residential district, with a train and underground tunnel system that connects the two. There are plenty of stores here, including an accessory shop, as well as lots of houses lined up. Within the world of Twilight Town is also the Tower, the residence of Yen Sid and Flora, Fauna, and Merryweather. Both Twilight Town and Yen Sid's Tower are other worlds to be found between light and darkness. Twilight Town holds the perfect balance between the two realms, while Yen Sid's Tower is more closely tied to the realm of light than any of the known worlds on this in between plane.

=Beast's Castle=
Beast's Castle is an ornate chateau based on the castle of Disney's thirtieth animated feature, ''Beauty and the Beast''. It is featured in ''Kingdom Hearts II'' as one of the first worlds visited on Sora's journey. Despite its large size, the castle is inhabited only by the Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Beast's Castle|Beast himself, Belle and the servants who have been turned into objects suited to their names, jobs, and personalities by an enchantress's spell.;Mrs. Potts: It was a cold winter's night... An old beggar woman came to the castle, and asked for shelter. / ... / Cogsworth: The master turned her away. All because of her, ahem, meager appearance. / ... / Cogsworth: Then the old woman's ugliness melted away to reveal a beautiful enchantress. / Mrs. Potts: She turned the Prince into a beast, a shape she thought fitting for his cold heart. / Cogsworth: And to further punish him, everyone in the castle was enchanted, too. ;

=The Land of Dragons=
The Land of Dragons is an imperial kingdom featured in ''Kingdom Hearts II'' and based on Disney's thirty-sixth animated feature, ''Mulan''. The Land of Dragons has an oriental atmosphere, characterized by harmony with nature. Nomura chose it for its unique atmosphere, and had already wanted to use it for while.; After a border skirmish heralds the impending invasion by the Huns, the country rapidly prepares for war, conscripting young men from every family. Unfortunately, the dark heart of the leader of the Huns, Characters of Kingdom Hearts#The Land of Dragons|Shan-Yu, has allowed him to take control of the Heartless and lead them in his invasion.;Sora: Shan-Yu and the Heartless did this, not us! ; The Encampment is the center of military activity in the area. The Checkpoint leads to both the Imperial City and a mountain village. The summit of the snow-capped mountain is the entryway for invading armies.

=Pride Land=
Pride Land is a savanna world based on Disney's animated feature, ''The Lion King''. It is featured in ''Kingdom Hearts II''. The in-game graphic for the name displays the name as &quot;Pride Land&quot;, as did the same graphic in the ''Kingdom Hearts II'' official strategy guide.; However, it is referred to as the &quot;Pride Lands&quot; in in-text dialog from ''Kingdom Hearts II'';Sora: Hmm... We should start by talking to Simba some more. Let's head back to the Pride Lands. ; as well as in content from the guide.; While in Pride Land, Characters_of_Kingdom_Hearts#Sora|Sora is transformed into a lion cub, Donald becomes a hornbill bird and Goofy takes the body of a tortoise. They transformed into animals because Nomura felt that since ''The Lion King'' film lacked any humans, it would appear odd to have Sora and the others interact in their standard forms. It was originally considered for inclusion in ''Kingdom Hearts'' but the game's engine could not correctly handle a quadrupedal animal as the player without an additional program. It was later added into ''Kingdom Hearts II''.;

After the death of the previous king, Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Pride Land|Mufasa, his deceitful brother Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Pride Land|Scar took the throne. Since then, the Pride Land has seen a steady decline in living conditions, due to his poor rule. Pride Land is dominated by a large central savannah area which branches off in three directions. To the north is Pride Rock, home of the lions and the seat of the world's political power. The area southwest of the savanna is where outcasts from Pride Rock, such as the hyenas, live. The skeletons of several large elephants earns this area its nickname, the Elephant Graveyard. Southeast of the savanna are the Wastelands, an arid desert of little life. Beyond the Wastelands, however, is a lush oasis.

=Port Royal=
Port Royal is a port with surrounding waters, based on Disney's live action film, ''Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl'', and is featured in ''Kingdom Hearts II''. The inclusion of this world was aided by technology that generated the character models from live-action pictures.; A local legend tells of a fearsome pirate ship called the Black Pearl with a crew of undead pirates led by Characters of Kingdom Hearts#Port Royal|Captain Barbossa. Another legend is of a grand Aztec treasure hoard of eight-hundred and eighty-two pieces which curses those who disturb it with eternal un-life.;Barbossa: This is no trinket, missy. This is cursed Aztec gold. One of eight hundred and eighty-two identical pieces they delivered in a stone chest to Cortez himself. ; Port Royal, named after the eponymous town in real life, is a well-defended port city in the Caribbean. The mystical island where the Aztec treasure is kept, Isla de Muerta, cannot be found except by those who already know its location.

=The World That Never Was=
The World That Never Was; the heart-shaped moon is known as &quot;Kingdom Hearts&quot;.
, introduced in ''Kingdom Hearts II'', is home to Organization XIII, and is situated next to the realm of darkness in an in-between realm. It also houses the headquarters to Organization XIII, the Castle That Never Was, which is portrayed as a huge white castle decorated with the emblem of the Nobodies, in addition to Dark City, a deserted metropolis of skyscrapers.

The most distinct feature of this world is its seemingly eternal night, with the large, heart-shaped moon, Kingdom Hearts, continually shining in the sky. Kingdom Hearts was designed to appear as the heart-shaped moon from the cover of the first ''Kingdom Hearts'' game. When the scenario writer, Kazushige Nojima, created the scenario, he described it as a moon floating in the World That Never Was. Upon reading that, Nomura thought of using the visuals from the first game to create a connection.;


Reception
The ''Kingdom Hearts'' games have met with positive receptions and sales, as well as receiving several video game awards. One such award was &quot;Best Art Style/Direction&quot; in IGN's 2003 list of &quot;Best Looking Games on PS2&quot;.;; As of December of 2006, the ''Kingdom Hearts'' series has shipped over 10 million copies worldwide, with 2.0 million copies in PAL regions, 3.0 million copies in Japan, and 5.6 million copies in North America.;;;; The graphics of the games have received numerous praise. IGN rated the graphics a 9/10 and stated that the &quot;worlds look very much like their filmed counterparts.&quot;;; Japanese gaming site, Gpara.com also praised the look of the worlds.;; GameSpot referred to the worlds as &quot;wonderfully rich familiar environments&quot;,;; and GamePro described the worlds as &quot;spot-on with the original movies.&quot;;;

References


External links
*[http://na.square-enix.com/games/kingdomhearts/ Official ''Kingdom Hearts'' site]
*[http://www.kingdom-hearts.com/ Official international ''Kingdom Hearts ''site]



Category:Video game locations
Category:Kingdom Hearts