
;
Shiryu (紫龍 ''Shiryū'', &quot;Lavender Dragon&quot;, more properly romanized as ''Shiryuu''), often titled ''Dragon'' Shiryu is one of five protagonists in the manga, ''Saint Seiya'', authored by Masami Kurumada and later adapted to anime. He is considered the most matured of the five heroes, and thus the wisest. As the Bronze Saint of the Dragon constellation, Shiryu dons the emerald Dragon cloth with its legendary defense properties.

In Japan, Shiryu is the most popular characters in Saint Seiya ranking in 1st in the main characters poll of the five Bronze Saints ;''Saint Seiya'' Volume 3, Argentinian Edition, Japanese characters poll;.

Concept and creation
As Masami Kurumada uses the revered Osamu Tezuka's Star System technique, (A stable cast of characters which play a a different or similar role in the author's various works, sometimes with the same personality and sometimes with an entirely new one), he designed Shiryuu's appearance very similar to Eidou Jun, a character in the successful Ring ni Kakero, a manga that Kurumada wrote and drew years before Saint Seiya, and that he considers his favorite creation.

Character Outline
=The Saint of Dragon=
Out of all five main characters, Shiryu is known as the calmest and most collected . His sheer physical strength is the greatest of the bronze saints, with perhaps the exception of Phoenix Ikki.This is reflected in his ability to have won numerous battles without his Dragon cloth. Shiryu trained at the Five Old Peaks in China to obtain the bronze cloth of the Dragon constellation, and his mentor was none other than senior gold saint, Libra Dohko.

Shiryu sports a large tattoo-like image of a green and white dragon on his back (however it is said in the manga and the anime that it is not a tattoo but is connected to his guardian dragon star and only appears as his cosmo is rising). Whenever his life is in danger, the tattoo-like image begins to fade away -- once it completely vanishes, it is a sign that Shiryu's cosmos is nearing zero -- as in death.

=Power and abilities=
During his training in Rozan, Shiryu awoke his cosmos and learned many techniques from Libra Dohko. He also has a good ability in many fighting styles like Kenjutsuand Taijutsu. During the Sanctuary Arc, Shiryu awake the 7th sense in his fight against Cancer Deathmask and later he awoke the 8th sense during the Hades Arc. 

His signature technique is . It is a blow that usually knocks the opponent soaring into the air as an image of a dragon devours him. The power of the Rozan Rising Dragon Force can vary from capable to explosively powerful, depending on Shiryu's cosmos level at the time of execution. Unlike the favorite techniques of the other bronze saints, however, Shiryu's Rozan Rising Dragon Force does have one weakness -- while performing the move, his heart will be left open for a millisecond. Only three people in the series have noted this: his master, Libra Dohko, Bronze Saint Pegasus Seiya and Gold Saint Capricorn Shura.

Other minor attacks that seem to be his weakest ones are , a straight-to-the-point, jumping attack where Shiryu charges through his opponents with a single fist and , that Shiryu has, to date, used only once, against Cancer Deathmask, in vol. 8 of the manga, and therefore, in episode 39 of the anime adaptation. Shiryu leapt high into the air and dived toward his opponent with a sharp kick to the head. Also, although he has only used it once to date, among his defensive techniques, Shiryu knows the fabled ; the traditional technique used in japanese Kenjutsu to repel an opponent's sword when unarmed, Shiryu used it to stop Capricorn Shura's attacks as his fists and legs were similar to a razor-sharp blade.

During the Hades Arc Shiryu learns the . Shiryu learned the it from watching his master's battle (although being blind in that moment). It is a technique that appears to be a 100x of the Rozan Rising Dragon Force or the Rozan Dragon Flight -- Shiryu's cosmos erupts at its maximum, and he ploughs through the enemy with both arms and palms extended. 100 dragons march in the sky as the enemies are destroyed by this energy-based offensive attack.

The final move that Shiryu uses when all else fails is . It is a kamikaze technique similar to Seiya's &quot;Pegasus Rolling Crush,&quot; except while Seiya normally intends to send both himself and his opponent back to the ground, Shiryu will continue to soar into the air and eventually into space -- killing both himself and his enemy. The Rozan Ultimate Dragon Force is something that Dohko had strongly discouraged Shiryu from using, even going as far as putting a ban on its use.

After defeating Capricorn Shura, Shiryu is entrusted with the gold saint's legendary technique . It is not a physical sword, but a deadly cosmos precision focused on Shiryu's right arm. Although Shiryu's version of the sword was not as defined as Shura's (Shiryu's Excalibur lies only in his right arm, while Shura's can be unleashed from any point of his body), the Dragon later refined it enough to rival Shura's and used it to cut the unbreakable golden spear of Chrysaor Krishina of Mariner General during the Poseidon Chapter.

=Constellation and the Shield of the Dragon=
The Bronze Cloth of Dragon is legendary for its large shield on the left arm guard. Its reputation is unmatched by any other cloth among Athena's saints, and only very few have ever shattered it. The Dragon Cloth itself is noted for its ultimate durability, as it had spent the last 200 years bathed under the mineral-rich waterfall of the Rozan mountains, which made it harder than diamonds, and that's the origin of the nickname &quot;The strongest Fist and Shield&quot;. 
Seiya managed to destroy the Shield by tricking Shiryu into hitting his own shield.
Shiryu with the anime only first version of the Dragon Cloth
Shiryu's cloth has suffered various damages throughout the series, and, of course, required repairing. With each revision its shape gained a new form. In the anime, along with the same repairs from the manga, the cloth went through three different designs. Changes:
*Manga 1st change: When he wears it after having Mu repair it from near death as a result of his match with Seiya in the Galaxian Wars.
*Anime 1st change: When Aries Mu used his blood to repair the cloth in time for Shiryu to use it in the battle against Asgard's God Warriors.
*Manga 2nd change: When it is revived with the blood of his master, gold saint Libra Dohko.
*Anime 2nd change/Manga 3rd change: When Mu's master and the former Pope of Sanctuary, Shion, rejuvenated it from damages with Athena's blood.
*Manga 4th change: When Shiryu's cosmos exploded at its max and the cloth naturally evolved into the Bronze God Cloth of Dragon.

Due to having reformed from using a gold saint's blood, the third version of the Dragon cloth (second in the anime) can suddenly become golden with power whenever Shiryu uses his cosmos to the maximum. At that point, Shiryu has awoken his 7th sense, and is as powerful as a gold saint (however, in the battle with Chrysaor Krishna, he comments that even with the golden Dragon cloth, Shiryu's power level is still that of a Bronze Saint, and continues to overpower Shiryu with his attacks).

The Dragon Cloth represents the constellation Draco, which is associated to Ladon, the hundred eyed dragon who guarded the golden apples of the Hesperides, in Greek mythology.

=The Gold Cloth of Libra=
During times of extreme stress, the main five bronze saints will be allowed to wear gold cloths for a temporary amount of time. In the Sanctuary arc, Shiryu showcased the 12 weapons of the Libra Dohko#Gold Libra Cloth|Libra Gold Cloth when he, Seiya, and Shun needed help in freeing Hyoga from the Aquarius Saint's ice coffin. This was the first time Shiryu tested the Libra Cloth, but certainly not the last. In the respective battles against Poseidon, Lord of the Seas, and Thanatos, God of Death, Shiryu was given the Libra Cloth to aid his friends.


Notable People &amp; Events
=Partners=
Shiryu was one of the 100 orphans that the Graude Foundation sent throughout the world to train as saints. Even as a child, he was shown to be a remarkable prodigy. When the bronze saints are reunited later, Shiryu battled Seiya in the Galaxian Wars, a tournament set up by Saori Kido and the Grade Foundation to lure out the villain of Sanctuary. 

In the match, Seiya proved to be no match for Shiryu's physical prowess, but ultimately was able to defeat the Dragon through the use of his head -- figuratively and literally, as he ducked a punch to the head from Shiryu which landed on his shield, destroying it and rendering Shiryu defenseless. 

Soon after, Seiya discovered that Shiryu's Rozan Rising Dragon Wave had one glaring weakness, and took advantage of it. Shiryu was promptly defeated, but as a result, Seiya's punch to his heart had unintentionally sent him into a near-dead state. Only another punch from Seiya could jump-start the Dragon's heart again -- provided that he did not fail to aim incorrectly and really kill Shiryu in the process. Shunrei, Shiryu's sworn sister, told this to Seiya, and Seiya accepted to help because he never intended to kill Shiryu in the first place.

With Andromeda Shun holding Shiryu steady, and Cygnus Hyoga focusing Seiya's fist at the correct point of contact, a heavily fatigued Seiya managed to hit Shiryu's chest with exact precision. The Dragon Saint's heart began to beat once more, and the dying Dragon was revived. Even though Shiryu had lost his match, he was grateful of Seiya's display for friendship.

From this point on, the Dragon Saint and the Pegasus Saint became good friends and formed a strong bond together. This is most evident when Shiryu did not hesitate to volunteer half of the blood in his body to revive the Pegasus and Dragon Cloths -- a choice that would've meant certain death for the saint. Inspired and indebted to the fact that Seiya saved his life, Shiryu promptly slit his wrists and poured his fresh blood onto the cloths.

While Shiryu's bonds with Hyoga, Shun, and Ikki aren't as strong as it is with Seiya, he still considers them &quot;brothers&quot; and will gladly die in battle with them. In the 3rd ''Saint Seiya'' feature film, Shiryu saves Shun from nearly falling off a cliff. In the Hades chapter, Shiryu is teamed up with Hyoga as they travel through the various prison camps of the Underworld.

As is the case with Shun, Hyoga, and Ikki, Shiryu initially did not want anything to do with Saori Kido until she revealed herself to be the goddess Athena, the goddess that they must serve. He eventually grows to respect her as a friend and his lady in liege.

=Shunrei=
Shunrei is a girl Shiryu met when he first arrived at the Rozan Peaks. Shunrei was abandoned and left alone at a young age, and was found by Dohko who took her in and raised her as his granddaughter. Unlike most of the women of ''Saint Seiya'' (such as Sori, Shaina or Marin), Shunrei is an ordinary girl with no special abilities, kinda like Seiya's best friend Miho: she serves as a caretaker for Dohko, as well as a possible romantic interest for her &quot;brother&quot; Shiryu.

A peace-loving young woman, Shunrei strongly disapproves of Shiryu's violent lifestyle of sainthood, as she fears that he would one day lose his life in a battle. Nevertheless, the duty of a saint ''is'' life and death to them, and Shunrei has found herself unable to persuade Shiryu to stay home whenever he feels the need to take off for battle. In the anime, Shunrei seems to have somewhat accepted such a thing; in the Poseidon arc, though she tried to talk Shiryu into not going to fight the Sea God, she couldn't bring herself to speak about it directly and preferred to wait alongside Dohko for Shiryu's return.

In the Sanctuary arc, Shiryu was forced to blind himself, and lost his will to carry on as a saint. He resigned himself to Shunrei's care until he eventually realized that blindness did not hinder a saint's fighting ability as much as he had previously assumed. In any case, Shunrei was shown to be content with nursing him during this point of the Dragon Saint's life, and even pushed him forward verbally in the anime to cheer him up.

During Shiryu's fight with Cancer Deathmask, Shunrei couldn't sleep and spent hours praying for her best friend's sake in Rozan. Her prayers were so strong that Deathmask couldn't concentrate and deliver the final blow; he then used his powers to throw Shunrei off the cliff she was praying and into the cascade. This greatly enraged Shiryu, increasing his cosmos like he had never done until then, and managed to defeat and kill Deathmask. He later learns through Dohko that Shunrei had survived, thanks to Dohko's own powers.

=Libra Dohko=
The Gold Saint of Libra, the most senior of all Athena's saints (with the exception of Pope Shion, who was Dohko's war buddy), was the man who taught Shiryu the basics needed to become a saint, and the man who bestowed Shiryu with his Dragon Cloth. Training with the old master was not easy for Shiryu, however, as he had to endure and complete many difficult tasks. When the time came for Shiryu to finally earn his cloth, Dohko had one simple but tough test for him to pass -- he must reverse the downward flow of the Rozan waterfall in order to reveal the Dragon Cloth hidden beneath. Shiryu smiled confidently at first, but after several failed attempts, he realized that this was going to be much harder than he had anticipated. In the end, the would-be Dragon Saint burned his cosmos at the maximum and, with a thunderous flying kick, not only splashed and reversed the flow of the waterfall, but also created an image of a soaring dragon with the splashing water from the impact.

In the Hades saga, Dohko at last removed himself from the Rozan Peaks and returned to Sanctuary, where he battled his old friend Shion.Near the very beginning of the fight, Dohko explained that he had in fact remained at the Rozan Peaks for the past 273 years in order to watch over the seal on the 108 Stars of Darkness, and shed his skin to reveal that Athena's blessing had caused him to age only 273 days since he began his watch.It is here that Dohko taught Shiryu the Rozan One Hundred Dragons Wave first-hand. Shiryu was amazed by the sheer power of the attack, and later on used it against three spectres in his journey through the Underworld.

=Tiger Ohko=
Just as Shiryu symbolizes the dragon, Ohko is a symbol for the tiger. In Chinese mythologies, the dragon and the tiger are ferocious rivals, and ''Saint Seiya'' portrays this as such. Ohko was a fellow student of Dohko's, and aspired to obtain the Dragon Cloth for himself. Thus, he and Shiryu were rivals, although unlike Ohko, Shiryu did not have any hostility towards his mate. Soon enough, Ohko found himself kicked out of Dohko's teachings for his rowdy behavior, and the young rogue vowed that he would one day return and have his revenge against the old master and Shiryu.

That day arrived in the Sanctuary arc, when Shiryu -- blinded from his battle with Silver Saint Perseus Algol -- was resting and no longer considered himself a true saint due to his loss of sight. Ohko challenged Shiryu to a duel, and defeated the unwilling and handicapped Dragon easily. Unsatisfied, Ohko berated the Dragon and set up a rematch by kidnapping Shunrei. Shiryu, forced to revive the abilities he had decidedly abandoned, finally chose to truly participate in the fight. Considering Shiryu's blindness as an unfair advantage for him, Onko wrapped his own eyes with a piece of cloth and the two former mates battled. Shiryu emerged victorious, and while Ohko lost, he felt satisfied. With his last dying breath, Ohko made Shiryu realize that his blindness was a non-factor when it came to his using his abilities as a saint.

Ohko exists in the anime adaptation of ''Saint Seiya'' only.

=Cancer Deathmask=
Shiryu and Deathmask first met in the Rozan Peaks when the Gold Saint of Cancer, under the order of Pope Ares, arrived to assassinate Dohko and reclaim the Gold Cloth of Libra for Sanctuary. Shiryu attempted to stop the gold saint when he revealed his intentions, and Deathmask waved him off. Shiryu donned the Dragon Cloth after a long hiatus and challenged Deathmask to a match. Deathmask complied, but the fight did not happen -- the arrival of Aries Mu caused the Cancer Saint to retreat for the time being.

When Shiryu joined the other bronze saints in their war against the gold saints of Sanctuary, Shiryu and Deathmask once again met and the two decided to resume where they had left off. Shiryu proved to be no match for Deathmask's Seki Shiki Meikai Ha -- a technique that sends the soul of the opponent into the gateway to the Underworld. Deathmask began to torture Shiryu's soul physically and mentally, and the Dragon almost fell to the gold saint's power -- Shiryu was only saved each time from certain death because of Shunrei's constant prayers for his well-being. Soon, Deathmask became irritated by Shunrei's preyer vibe, and openly attacked her with telekinesis. Shunrei was sent from a section of the Rozan waterfalls and into the deep waters below. Enraged, Shiryu burned his cosmos to the max and reached the 7th sense. At the same time, Deathmask's Cancer Cloth opted to abandoned him from having grown tired of its owner's various evil deeds. Without the protection of the powerful gold cloth, Deathmask suffered heavy damages from Shiryu's hard blows, and not long after, the gold saint was knocked down to the pit of the Underworld -- directly to Hell.

After this battle, Shiryu miraculously regained his eye sight. It seems that when he reached the 7th sense in the underworld during the fight, it created a special restoration effect on his eyes. This effect is repeated later on when Siryu regains is sight in the Hades arc upon entering hell.

=Capricorn Shura=
Shiryu's second opponent in the 12 temples was Capricorn Shura. In the Sanctuary, Shura was known as &quot;The Most Loyal of All 88 Saints of Athena,&quot; and as such, Athena had granted him the Excalibur -- the ability to unleash an ultra sharp cosmos precision from any point of his body. As is the norm for a gold saint, Shura was also insanely fast and agile -- this match proved to be one of Shiryu's toughest fights, if not ''the'' toughest.

Not even the legendary shield of the Dragon Cloth could withstand the Excalibur, as Shura sliced the shield into two almost effortlessly. Shiryu's Rozan Rising Dragon Wave had no effect on the gold saint either -- Shura even noticed the technique's fatal flaw after seeing it once. Desperate and out of usable moves, Shiryu chose to defy his master's ban on the Rozan Ultimate Dragon Wave. The bronze saint lured the Capricorn into getting close by unleashing the Rozan Rising Dragon Wave once more -- baiting the gold saint to explore the technique's flaw and dig his Excalibur into the Dragon's heart. When Shura did so, Shiryu immediately grabbed onto the gold saint's wrist and, using the most of his 7th sense, sliced off Shura's lower arm and quickly latched himself behind him. The Dragon Saint then unleashed the forbidden Rozan Ultimate Dragon Wave technique, and the two men were shot into the air.

When Shura questioned why Shiryu would sacrifice him precious life for Saori Kido -- someone who, according to Pope Ares, was a blatant impersonator --, Shiryu replied that he believed Saori to truly be the real Athena, and the proof is in the five bronze saints' utter devotion in saving her. Shura finally realized that he had made a huge error in opposing them, and declared that a loyal man like Shiryu cannot afford to die. Using the last bit of his own cosmos, Shura transferred the Capricorn Gold Cloth onto Shiryu for protection, then kicked the Dragon Saint back onto the Earth. As Shura's body began to grind into dust from the pressures of outer space, he told Shiryu to watch over Athena in his stead.

Little did Shiryu know, Shura had also given the bronze saint a final gift -- the Excalibur, the sword of the most loyal saint of Athena. In his battle against the Sea General Chrysaor Krishna in the Poseidon chapter, Shura appeared to Shiryu as a spiritual entity and revealed this to the Dragon. Encouraged by the gold saint, Shiryu sharpened his cosmos to the max, and the Excalibur in his right arm proved itself useful in penetrating Krishna's powerful defenses.

Shiryu and Shura met once again when the Capricorn Saint returned with six other formerly-dead gold saints in the Hades arc. Shura and the others appeared to have defected to the side of Hades, and Shiryu was forced to remind him that his Excalibur and a part of his soul reside within the Dragon's right arm. Later on, as Shura was on the verge of death once more, the gold saint cited that, indeed, the Excalibur and a part of his soul lives on in Shiryu's arm.

Notes

*In Kurumada's canon, the zodiacal sign of a Gold Cloth bearer must match the sign his Cloth represents. The Capricorn Gold Cloth protected Shiryu despite his zodiacal sign is Libra, as it recognized him as a true Saint who fought to protect Athena and the peace of Earth.

References

;;




Category:Saint Seiya characters
Category:Japanese anime and manga characters
Category:Fictional orphans

es:Shiryū
fr:Shiryu (Saint Seiya)
it:Sirio il Dragone
ja:龍星座の紫龍
pt:Shiryu de Dragão
th:ดราก้อน ชิริว