
 June 12, 1981
| runtime= 115 minutes
| country= 
| language = English 
| budget = USD $20,000,000 US (est.)
| gross= USD $384,140,454;;
| followed_by= ''Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom''
| website= http://www.indianajones.com/
| amg_id = 1:40118
| imdb_id= 0082971
}}
''Raiders of the Lost Ark'', also known as ''Indiana Jones and the Raiders of the Lost Ark'', is a 1981 adventure film directed by Steven Spielberg, produced by George Lucas and starring Harrison Ford. It is the first in the Indiana Jones film and television series, and the twenty-fourth in internal chronology. In the film, the Nazis are searching for the lost Ark of the Covenant to make their army invincible, as it did for the Israelites of the Old Testament, and it is up to archaeologist and adventurer Indiana Jones to find it first. 

When released on June 12, 1981, the $20 million (USD) film was a huge success, easily the highest grossing film of 1981, earning $384 million worldwide, and, at the time, one of the highest-grossing movies ever made. It was nominated for eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, in 1982 and won four (Best Sound, Best Film Editing, Best Visual Effects, Best Art Direction-Set Decoration). The film was a hit with audiences and critics alike leading to two more films, ''Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom'' and ''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade'', ''The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles'' television series, and a fourth film, ''Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull'', in production for release in 2008.

Plot
In 1936, in the Peruvian jungle, archaeologist/treasure hunter Indiana Jones braves several booby traps to retrieve a golden idol from an ancient temple. After escaping, he finds rival archaeologist Rene Belloq waiting outside with a group of Hovitos, the local natives. Surrounded and outnumbered, Jones is forced to give up the artifact to Belloq. Jones manages to escape from Belloq and the Hovitos by flying away on a waiting seaplane. Indiana Jones attempts to take the idol in the opening of the film.

At the American college where he teaches archaeology, Jones meets with two Army intelligence agents. They explain that the Nazis, in their quest to gain occult power, are searching for Abner Ravenwood, Jones’s former mentor. Ravenwood is the foremost expert on the ancient Egyptian city of Tanis, which has been rediscovered by the Nazis and is believed to be the location of the Ark of the Covenant, a chest the Israelites built to hold the Ten Commandments. Jones surmises that the Nazis seek Ravenwood because he possesses the headpiece to the Staff of Ra, a key artifact which is essential in pinpointing the Ark’s resting place. His colleague Marcus Brody explains that, according to legend, the power of the Ark can make any army invincible.

Jones flies to Nepal, only to find that Ravenwood has died; his daughter Marion, Jones's embittered former lover, has the headpiece, which she wears as a medallion. As a result of a gunfight between Jones and a sadistic Nazi agent named Toht, Marion's tavern is burned down. Toht's hand is scarred with the face of the medallion, whereas Jones ends up in possession of both the headpiece and Marion, who decides to travel with him. The two fly to Cairo and meet up with Sallah, a skilled Egyptian digger, who says that he knows where the Nazis, with the assistance of Belloq, are digging for the Ark. Nazi operatives kidnap Marion and fake her death in front of Jones. That evening, Sallah and Jones decipher the carvings on the headpiece. Based on their translation, they realize the Nazis used the wrong length for the Staff of Ra, and are digging in the wrong place.
Indiana and Sallah lift up the Ark of the Covenant
Infiltrating the dig, Indy sneaks into the map room, which contains a complete to-scale model of the city of Tanis. According to legend, the headpiece would reveal the exact location of the Well of Souls, the actual chamber containing the Ark, by focusing daylight onto the city mock-up at a certain time of day. Although Sallah is nearly exposed and captured in the attempt, Indy successfully acquires the location. He and Sallah gather a small crew and begin to dig at the correct location. After several hours, they break through the roof of the buried Well of Souls. Jones is lowered to the floor of the temple and finds it infested with multitudes of poisonious snakes, of which he is deathly afraid. After he and Sallah hoist the Ark out of the temple, Belloq and the Nazis appear and take control of the Ark. Marion is tossed into the Well with Jones, and they are sealed in. The duo manage to escape, emerging aboveground in time to find a Luftwaffe flying wing being prepared to transport the Ark to Berlin. They accidentally blow up the plane, therefore the Ark is put on a truck to Cairo, where it will be shipped to Berlin. Stealing a horse, Jones pursues the convoy escorting the truck, seizes control of the vehicle, and, after an extended pursuit, escapes with the Ark. That evening, Jones and Marion leave Sallah to escort the Ark to England onboard the tramp steamer ''Bantu Wind''.

The next morning, a Nazi U-boat commanded by Belloq and Nazi officer Dietrich stops the ship. Marion and the Ark are removed, while Jones covertly boards the U-boat. He follows Belloq and the Ark to an isolated island, where they plan to test the power of the Ark before presenting it to the Führer. Threatening to destroy the Ark with a rocket launcher, Jones demands that the Nazis free Marion. Belloq calls his bluff, claiming that Indy, as an archaeologist, wants to see it opened as badly as Belloq; Jones is forced to surrender. Marion and Jones are tied up while Belloq and the Nazis perform a ceremonial opening of the Ark. Spirits emerge from within; Jones, aware of the supernatural danger of looking at the open Ark, warns Marion to close her eyes. The group of Nazis, who do not look away, are destroyed in the Ark's awesome display, and the Ark closes itself once more with a crack of thunder. Back in Washington, D.C., the two Army intelligence men tell a suspicious Jones that &quot;top men&quot; are carefully studying the Ark. In reality, the artifact is sealed in a wooden crate and stored in a giant government warehouse, filled with countless similar crates.

Development
In 1973, George Lucas wrote ''The Adventures of Indiana Smith''.;; Like ''Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope|Star Wars,'' it was an opportunity to create a modern version of the serials of the 1930s and 1940s.;; Lucas discussed the concept with Philip Kaufman, who worked with him for several weeks and came up with the Ark of the Covenant as the plot device. The project was stalled when Clint Eastwood hired Kaufman to direct ''The Outlaw Josey Wales''.;Hearn, p.112-115; In late May 1977, Lucas was in Maui, trying to escape the enormous success of ''Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope|Star Wars''. Friend and colleague Steven Spielberg was also there, holidaying from work on ''Close Encounters of the Third Kind''. While building a sand castle at Mauna Kea,;; Spielberg expressed an interest in directing a James Bond film. Lucas convinced his friend Spielberg that he had conceived a character &quot;better than James Bond&quot; and explained the concept of ''Raiders of the Lost Ark''. Spielberg loved it, calling it &quot;a James Bond film without the hardware&quot;,;; though he had the character's surname changed to &quot;Jones&quot;.;

The following year, Lucas focused on developing ''Raiders'' and the ''Star Wars'' sequel ''Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back|The Empire Strikes Back'', during which Lawrence Kasdan and Frank Marshall joined the project as screenwriter and producer respectively. Between January 23-January 27, 1978 for nine hours a day, Lucas, Kasdan and Spielberg discussed the story and visual ideas. Spielberg came up with Jones being chased by a boulder, ; and Lucas came up with a submarine, a monkey giving the Nazi salute, and a girl slugging Jones in Nepal.; Kasdan used a 100 page transcript of their conversations for his first script draft,;Hearn, p.122-123; working for six months.; Ultimately some of their ideas were too grand and had to be cut: a mine chase,;Script [http://www.movie-page.com/scripts/Raiders-of-the-Lost-Ark.html 3rd Draft], scene 45-47; an escape in Shanghai using a rolling gong as a shield,;Script [http://www.movie-page.com/scripts/Raiders-of-the-Lost-Ark.html 3rd Draft], scene 148-155; and a jump from an airplane in a raft, all of which made it into the sequel.;

Spielberg and Lucas disagreed on the character: although Lucas saw him as a Bondian playboy, Kasdan and Spielberg felt the professor and adventurer elements of the character made him complex enough. Spielberg had darker visions of Jones, interpreting him as an alcoholic similar to Humphrey Bogart's character Fred C. Dobbs in ''The Treasure of the Sierra Madre''. This characterization fell away during the later drafts.; Spielberg also initially conceived of Toht with a robotic arm, which Lucas rejected as falling into science-fiction. Comic book artist Jim Steranko was also commissioned to produce original illustrations for pre-production, which heavily influenced Spielberg's decisions in both the look of the film and the character of Indiana Jones himself.;;

As ''The Empire Strikes Back'' began post-production in September 1979, Lucas began to find a distribution deal for ''Raiders of the Lost Ark''.;Hearn, p.127-134; Studios were reluctant following Spielberg's flop ''1941'', unable to believe he could bring the film for $20 million which they would have to pay for.; They also balked at simply distributing the film while the filmmakers took a larger share of box office receipts; and full ownership of the film.; Despite a concern that the first sequence alone would cost $20 million,;; Paramount Pictures under Michael Eisner accepted; on condition of making at least four sequels with Lucasfilm.; By April 1980, Kasdan's fifth draft was produced, and production was getting ready to shoot at Elstree Studios, with Lucas trying to keep costs down.; With four illustrators, ''Raiders of the Lost Ark'' was Spielberg's most storyboarded film of his career to date, further helping the film economically, and he and Lucas agreed on a tight schedule to stylistically follow the &quot;quick and dirty&quot; feel of the Saturday matinée serials.;

Production
Filming began on June 23, 1980 at La Rochelle, France, for scenes involving the Nazi submarine,; which was rented from the movie ''Das Boot''. The U-boat pen was a genuine one that had survived from World War II.; The crew moved to Elstree Studios; for scenes involving the Well of Souls, the interiors of the temple in the opening sequence and Marion Ravenwood's bar.;; The Well of Souls required 7000 snakes, though the only poisonous snakes on set were the cobras. However, one crew member was bitten by a python on set.; To shoot the scene where Indiana comes face-to-face with the cobra, a glass sheet was put between Ford and the animal, partially visible when the light hits it at a certain angle.; Unlike the character he portrayed, Ford does not actually have a fear of snakes; Spielberg was not afraid either, but seeing all the snakes on the set writhing around made him &quot;want to puke&quot;.; The opening sequence featured live tarantulas: Alfred Molina had to have many put on him, but they did not move until a female was placed there. Molina found the experience creepy. A fibreglass boulder 22 feet in diameter was made for the scene where Indiana escapes the temple, but Spielberg rejected it and had it made 50 feet (15.2 m) larger.;

All of the scenes set in Egypt and the canyon where Indiana threatens to blow up the Ark were filmed in Tunisia; many of the locations were repeated from ''Star Wars'', since many people in the location crew were the same for both films.; Notably, that canyon was the exact same location wherein R2-D2 was attacked by List of Star Wars races (F-J)#Jawa|Jawas.;Filming there was a harsh experience due to the heat and disease. Several members of the cast &amp; crew fell ill; Rhys-Davies in particular defecated in his costume during one shot.;Spielberg was never ill, as he only ate tinned foods from England.; Spielberg did not like the area and quickly pushed forward a scheduled six-week shoot to four-and-a-half weeks. Much was improvised there: the scene wherein Marion puts on her dress and attempts to leave Belloq's tent was improvised, as was the entire plane fight. During shooting of that scene, Ford tore his cruciate ligament in his left leg as a wheel went over his knee, but he did not accept medical help and simply put ice over it.; The fight scenes in the town were filmed in Kairouan; by then Ford was suffering from dysentery. He had enough, and did not want to shoot a fight scene between Indiana and a swordsman. He said to Spielberg &quot;Why don't we just shoot the sucker?&quot; Spielberg agreed, scrapped the rest of the fight scene, and filmed the gag of Indiana quickly shooting the swordsman.;; The truck chase was shot entirely by the second-unit who mostly followed Spielberg's storyboards, though they decided to add Indiana being dragged by the truck. Spielberg shot all the close-ups with Ford afterwards.;

The interior staircase set in Washington, D.C. was filmed inside of San Francisco's City Hall. The University of the Pacific, located in Stockton, California, stands in for the college where Jones works, and his home exteriors were filmed in the city of San Rafael, California.; The opening exteriors were filmed in Kauai, Hawaii, with Spielberg wrapping in September, finishing under schedule in 73 days, in contrast to his previous film, ''1941''.;; The Washington, D.C. exterior was a pick-up, as the film was originally written to end without any resolution of Indy's relationship to Marion.;;

Special effects were provided by Industrial Light &amp; Magic. These largely featured in the climactic sequence wherein the Ark of the Covenant was opened and spirits come out to attack the Nazis. The melting of Toht's head was done by exposing a wax model of Ronald Lacey's head to a heat lamp with an under cranked camera, while Dietrich's crushed head was a hollow model from which air was withdrawn. To avoid an R rating, fire was double exposed over Belloq's exploding head. The spirits were shot underwater for a ghostly look.;; Ben Burtt was sound effects supervisor, picking a 30-30 Winchester rifle for the sound of Jones' gun; for the various punching noises throughout the film, leather jackets and baseball gloves were whacked by a baseball bat to continue the comic-bookish feel of the film. For the snakes in the Well of Souls sequence, cheese casserole and sponges were used for the slithering, while lifting a toilet tank was used for the sound of opening the Ark. Burtt used a synthesizer for the sounds of the Ark, and mixed dolphins' and sea lions' screams for those of the spirits within.;;

Cast
*Harrison Ford stars as Indiana Jones, an adventurous archaeology professor, who often embarks on perilous adventures to obtain rare artifacts. Jones initially claim he has no belief in the supernatural, only to have his skepticism challenged when he discovers the Ark. Spielberg suggested casting Harrison Ford as Jones, but Lucas objected, stating that he didn't want Ford to become his &quot;Bobby De Niro&quot; or &quot;that guy I put in all my movies&quot;, a reference to Martin Scorsese, who often worked with De Niro.; Desiring a lesser known actor, Lucas persuaded Spielberg to help him search for a new talent. Among the actors who auditioned were Tim Matheson, Peter Coyote, and Tom Selleck. Selleck was originally cast in the role, but he was unavailable for the part because of his commitment to the television series ''Magnum, P.I.''; In June 1980, three weeks away from filming,;; Spielberg persuaded Lucas to cast Ford after producers Marshall and Kathleen Kennedy were impressed by his performance as Han Solo in ''The Empire Strikes Back''.;
 
*Karen Allen plays Marion Ravenwood, a spirited, tough old flame of Indiana. She is the daughter of Abner Ravenwood, Indiana Jones' mentor, and owns a bar in Nepal. Allen was after auditioning with Matheson and John Shea. Spielberg was interested in her, as he had seen her performance in ''National Lampoon's Animal House''. Sean Young had previously auditioned for the part. 

*John Rhys-Davies as Sallah. Sallah is &quot;the best digger in Egypt&quot;, and has been hired by the Nazis to help them excavate Tanis. Although he is suspicious of the Ark's power, he is an old friend of Indiana Jones, and agrees to help him obtain the Ark. Initially, Spielberg approached Danny DeVito to play Sallah, but could not play the part due to scheduling conflicts. Spielberg cast Rhys-Davies after seeing his performance in ''Shōgun (TV miniseries)|Shogun''.;

*Denholm Elliott as Marcus Brody. Marcus is a museum curator, and buys whatever artifacts Indiana obtains for display in his museum. The US governmental agents approach him in regards to recovering the Ark, and he sets up a meeting between them and Indiana Jones. Spielberg hired Elliott as he was a big fan of him.;

The main villains (from left to right): Colonel Dietrich (Wolf Kahler), Rene Belloq (Paul Freeman), and Arnold Toht (Ronald Lacey).
*Paul Freeman as Rene Belloq. Jones' arch nemesis, Belloq is also an archaeologist after the Ark, but he is working for the Nazis. He intends to harness the power of the Ark himself before Hitler could, but he is killed by the supernatural powers of the Ark after opening it.

*Ronald Lacey as Arnold Toht. Toht is an interrogator for the Nazis, who tries to torture Marion Ravenwood for the headpiece of the Staff of Ra. He only manages to obtain one side of it through a burn in his hand. He is killed by the supernatural powers of the Ark. Lacey was cast as he reminded Spielberg of Peter Lorre.;

*Wolf Kahler as Colonel Dietrich. Dietrich is a ruthless Nazi officer leading the operation to secure the Ark. He is killed by the supernatural powers of the Ark.

*Alfred Molina as Satipo. Satipo is one of Jones's guides through the South American jungle. He betrays Jones and steals the golden idol, but is killed by one of the traps in the temple.

Producer Frank Marshall played a pilot in the airplane fight sequence. The stunt team was ill, so he took the role instead. The result was three days in a cockpit that was over 140 degrees.; Pat Roach plays the large mechanic with whom Jones brawls in this sequence, as well as Toht's henchman in Marion's bar. He had the rare opportunity to be killed twice in one movie. ;; Special-effects supervisor Dennis Muren cameoed on the plane Indiana Jones takes to Nepal.;

Soundtrack






''Raiders of the Lost Arks score is most notable for featuring the rousing and iconic composition &quot;The Raiders March&quot; that came to symbolize Indiana Jones. The tune was composed by John Williams. The score also featured three other prominent themes: the grand yet mysterious &quot;Ark Theme&quot;, a theme associated with Marion, and the loud, pompous Nazi March, which harkens back to 1940s film scores. The score had received an Oscar nomination for best original score, but lost to Vangelis's electro-synth based score for ''Chariots of Fire''. John Williams composed the march in the two separate segments. When he played them for Steven Spielberg he told Williams that he liked them both, which led to the combined theme people know today.;;

Reaction
When released on June 12, the $20 million film was a huge success, easily the highest grossing film (earning $384 million worldwide) of 1981, and, at the time, one of the highest-grossing movies ever made.;; It was nominated for eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, in 1982 and won four (Best Sound, Best Film Editing, Best Visual Effects, Best Art Direction-Set Decoration). It also won a Special Achievement Award for Sound Effects Editing, bringing the total Oscars to five. It won numerous other awards, including seven Saturn Awards.;;

The film opened to mostly positive reviews from critics. In his review for the ''New York Times'', Vincent Canby praised the film, calling it, &quot;one of the most deliriously funny, ingenious and stylish American adventure movies ever made.&quot;;; Roger Ebert in his review for the ''Chicago Sun-Times'' wrote, &quot;Two things, however, make ''Raiders of the Lost Ark'' more than just a technological triumph: its sense of humor and the droll style of its characters...We find ourselves laughing in surprise, in relief, in incredulity at the movie's ability to pile one incident upon another in an inexhaustible series of inventions.&quot;;; He would later add it to his list of &quot;Great Movies&quot;.;; Stephen Klain of &quot;Variety&quot; also praised the film. However, he felt that the film was surprisingly violent and bloody for a PG-rated film.;; ''Rolling Stone'' said the film was &quot;the ultimate Saturday action matinee--a film so funny and exciting it can be enjoyed any day of the week.&quot;;Rolling Stone, June 25, 1981.; Bruce Williamson of ''Playboy'' claimed: &quot;There's more excitement in the first ten minutes of ''Raiders'' than any movie I have seen all year. By the time the explosive misadventures end, any movie-goer worth his salt ought to be exhausted.&quot;;Michael G. Ryan. &quot;''Raiders of the Lost Ark'' 20th Anniversary.&quot; ''Star Wars Insider''. July/August 2001.; However, Pauline Kael found the film &quot;impersonal&quot;; and the fast pacing was &quot;like being put through a Cuisinart.&quot;; Today, the film is considered to be a classic of the action and adventure genres by many contemporary critics and carries a 95% rating on Rotten Tomatoes.;;

Following the box office success of ''Raiders'', two more feature films were produced: ''Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom'', a prequel, and ''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade''. Another sequel, ''Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull'', is currently in production. A TV series, entitled ''The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles'', was also spun off from this film, and details the early years of the character. Numerous other books, comics, and video games have also been produced.

In 1998, the American Film Institute placed the film at number 60 on its top 100 films of the first century of cinema. In 1999, the film was deemed &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot; by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. Indiana Jones has become an icon, being listed as ''Entertainment Weeklys third favorite action hero, while noting &quot;some of the greatest action scenes ever filmed are strung together like pearls&quot; in this film.;;

An amateur shot-for-shot remake was made by Chris Strompolos, Eric Zala and Jayson Lamb, then children in Ocean Springs, Mississippi. It took the boys seven years to finish, from 1982-1989. After production of the film, called ''Raiders of the Lost Ark: The Adaptation'', wrapped in 1989, it was shelved and forgotten until 2003, where it was discovered by Eli Roth;; and acclaimed by Spielberg himself;; who congratulated the boys on their hard work and said he looked forward to seeing their names on the big screen.;; Scott Rudin and Paramount Pictures have purchased the trio's life rights and will be producing a film based on their adventures making their remake.;;

Video games
The only video game based exclusively on this movie is ''Raiders of the Lost Ark'', released in 1982 by Atari for their Atari 2600 console.

The first third of the video game ''Indiana Jones' Greatest Adventures'', released in 1994 by JVC for Nintendo's Super Nintendo Entertainment System, is based entirely on the film. Several sequences from the film are reproduced (the boulder run and the showdown with the Cairo Swordsman among them); however, several inconsistencies with the film are present in the game, such as Nazi soldiers and bats being present in the Well of Souls sequence, for example. The game was developed by LucasArts and Factor 5.

In ''Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine'' a bonus level brings Indy back to 'Peru, South America' from this movie. He can explore the cave and he discovers another hiddenidol.

Releases
The film was released on VHS in pan and scan only and on laserdisc in both pan and scan and widescreen. For its 1999 VHS re-issue, the film was remastered in THX and for the first time was made available in widescreen. The outer package was retitled ''Indiana Jones and the Raiders of the Lost Ark'' to correlate with the film's prequel and sequel. The subsequent DVD release in 2003 features this title as well. The title in the film itself remains unchanged, even in the restored DVD print.

References


Further reading
*
*
*

External links


*[http://www.indianajones.com/ IndianaJones.com], Lucasfilm's official Indiana Jones site
*
*
*
*[http://indianajones.wikicities.com The Indiana Jones Wiki], Indiana Jones fansite






;

Category:1981 films
Category:Best Visual Effects Academy Award winners
Category:Hugo Award Winner for Best Dramatic Presentation
Category:Indiana Jones films|1
Category:Films set in the 1930s
Category:English-language films
Category:United States National Film Registry

cs:Dobyvatelé ztracené archy
de:Jäger des verlorenen Schatzes
et:Indiana Jones kadunud laeka jälil
es:Raiders of the Lost Ark
eo:Raiders of the Lost Ark
fr:Les Aventuriers de l'arche perdue
hr:Otimači izgubljenog kovčega
it:I predatori dell'Arca perduta
he:שודדי התיבה האבודה
lb:Raiders of the Lost Ark
hu:Az elveszett frigyláda fosztogatói
nl:Raiders of the Lost Ark
ja:レイダース/失われたアーク《聖櫃》
no:Jakten på den forsvunne skatten
pl:Poszukiwacze zaginionej arki
pt:Raiders of the Lost Ark
ru:Индиана Джонс: В поисках утраченного ковчега (фильм)
simple:Raiders of the Lost Ark
sk:Dobyvatelia stratenej archy
fi:Kadonneen aarteen metsästäjät
sv:Jakten på den försvunna skatten
zh:法櫃奇兵