Asquith Randolph as The White Magician. Art by Mike Deodato.
The White Magician is a fictional character in the DC Comics book ''Wonder Woman''. He first appeared in ''Wonder Woman Annual'' Vol. 2, #3.

Character History

The White Magician was born Thomas Asquith Randolph. In the 1940s he was known as &quot;Mister Magik&quot;, a founding member of the now forgotten superhero team ''Echoes of Justice''. He altered his name to &quot;The White Sorcerer&quot; later in his career, finally setting on &quot;The White Magician&quot; as his permanent title.

Sometime between his early years as a hero to the present day The White Magician became power mad, often resorting to more sinister means of increasing his magical abilities as his magic began to wane with age. When he first encountered Wonder Woman in present day, he helped to cause a battle between the Amazon and the dark being Eclipso. In that altercation he had hoped to control and channel their power. Proving unsuccessful, he later formed a pact with a demon. He exchanged his soul for ultimate power.

The White Magician in his demonic form battling Artemis of Bana-Mighdall|Artemis. Art by Mike Deodato.

During this period, The White Magician performed various false heroic deeds in order for the public to continue to view him as a hero. Seeing through his deception, Diana let him know that she would stop him if he ever crossed the line to true evil. The White Magician saw Diana as a threat and helped increase the rivalry between two Boston mafia families, led by Paulie Longo and Julianna Sazia respectively, in order to keep Wonder Woman preoccupied while he continued his climb for power. Unfortunately for him the title of Wonder Woman was passed from Diana to the new champion of Themyscira, Artemis of Bana-Mighdall. Because of this, Diana's involvement with the mafia rivalry became unnecessary to him as Artemis continued Diana's investigation of him in her place.

When he became aware that Artemis was going to battle him, he used the life force of both anchor woman Cassandra Arnold and that of The Cheetah to transform himself into a giant demon, capable of defeating the Amazon. In the process the remains of his two victims became savage demons as well, obeying only The White Magician. Overwhelmed, Artemis kept up the fight until Diana was able to aid her, thanks to a disguised Circe teleporting her to her side. During the fight Circe attempted to use her magics on the demon, but the sorcery failed, as she was tied to her false mortal identity of Donna Milton. Using the last of her power, Circe teleported the two minor demons and herself away, leaving Diana and Artemis to battle The White Magician alone. Near death, Artemis gave her ''Gauntlet of Atlas'' (which gave its wearer 10 times their normal strength) to Diana to finish the battle. Diana was successful and killed The White Magician despite his high level of power.

Powers and Abilities
The White Magician is a high-level sorcerer, capable of using his magic in a variety of effects.

See also
* List of Wonder Woman enemies

External links
* [http://www.dcuguide.com/who.php?name=whitemagician DCU Guide Bio]

Category:Magic users in comics|White Magician, The
Category:DC Comics demons|White Magician, The
Category:DC Comics supervillains

tl:White Magician