CMSgt Chevron (1994-present)
;

Chief Master Sergeant (CMSgt) is the ninth, and highest, enlisted rank in the U.S. Air Force, just above Senior Master Sergeant, and is a non-commissioned officer.The official term of address is Chief Master Sergeant or Chief.

Attaining the rank of Chief Master Sergeant is the pinnacle of an Air Force enlisted member's career. Some Chief Master Sergeants manage the efforts of all enlisted personnel within their unit or major subsection thereof, while others run major staff functions at higher headquarters levels. All Chief Master Sergeants are expected to serve as mentors for company-grade and field-grade commissioned officers, as well as noncommissioned officers and junior enlisted members, and to serve as advisors to unit commanders and senior officers.

By Federal law, only one percent of the Air Force enlisted force may hold the rank of Chief Master Sergeant.

Special duty positions
E-9 First Sergeant
CCM insignia (1998-present)
=First Sergeant=
The position of First Sergeant in the pay grade of E-9 is the highest rank in the United States Air Force that one can hold while serving in the special duty position of First Sergeant.They are senior enlisted advisors to a unit commander. These First Sergeants (pay grades E-7 to E-9) are referred to officially as &quot;First Sergeant&quot; (regardless of their pay grade), and unofficially as &quot;First Shirt&quot; or simply the &quot;Shirt&quot;.

=Command Chief Master Sergeant=
The position of Command Chief Master Sergeant (CCM) was created in November 1998. Formerly titled Senior Enlisted Advisor, Command Chief Master Sergeants serve as senior advisors to commanders at Wing, Numbered Air Force (NAF), Field Operating Agency (FOA), and Major Command (MAJCOM) levels. When the senior enlisted position of a Joint Command is held by an Air Force member, that individual is also designated as a Command Chief Master Sergeant.



=Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force=
There exists one post, Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force (CMSAF), which is unique. The Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force is the designated representative of the entire Air Force enlisted force, speaking on behalf of the enlisted members of the Air Force.As of 2007, the current Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force is CMSgt Rodney J. McKinley.
;
CMSAF Chevron;(Nov 2004 - Present)

Historical notes
Although the Air Force had been an independent service since 1947, the rank of Chief Master Sergeant did not come into being until the authorization of the Military Pay Act of 1958.This act established the pay grades of E-8 and E-9, but without specifying titles for those pay grades.It wasn't until late 1958 that the title of Chief Master Sergeant (and the accompanying rank insignia) was decided upon.

Until his retirement in 2003, CMSgt Norman Marous was the Air Force's most senior Chief Master Sergeant, having served in the Air Force since 1962. It should be noted, however, that CMSgt. Marous left active duty in 1962 to spend 22 years in the USAF Reserve and National Guard before returning to active duty as a CMSgt in 1989.

See also
*Sergeant

References
*[http://www.e-publishing.af.mil/pubfiles/af/36/afi36-2618/afi36-2618.pdf Air Force Instruction 36-2618, The Enlisted Force Structure]
*Technical Sergeant Spink, Barry L.&quot;A Chronology of the Enlisted Rank Chevron of the United States Air Force, 19 February 1992.&quot;[http://afhra.maxwell.af.mil/chevron_history/chevrons.pdf Air Force Historical Research Agency].



Category:Enlisted ranks of the United States Air Force
Category:List of United States enlisted ranks
it:Sergente maggiore capo