
The Việt Nam Quốc Dân Đảng, or VNQDD or Việt Quốc, was the Vietnamese Nationalist Party, a socialist revolutionary political party which engaged in militant activity against the French colonization of Vietnam in the early 20th century.; The genesis of the VNQDD was formed in the mid 1920s by a group of young Hanoi-based intellectuals who distributed revolutionary material through their printing house. In 1927, the VNQDD was formed under the leadership of Nguyen Thai Hoc after the group's commercial ventures failed due to French harassment and censorship. Modeling itself on the Kuomintang of Chiang Kai-shek, the VNQDD gained a following among northerners, particular among teachers and intellectuals. The party had little following among the peasants or industrial workers and clandestinely organised itself into small cells. Beginning in the 1928, the VNQDD began to generate attention through its assassinations of French officials and Vietnamese collaborators. The turning point came in February 1929 with the assassination of Bazin, a French labor recruiter who was widely despised among the Vietnamese population. Although the membership of the perpetrators was unclear, the French authorities attributed the killing to the VNQDD and launched a crackdown, arresting between three and four hundred of the approximately 1500 members. Many of the leadership group were arrested, but Hoc managed to escape.

Later in 1929, the party weakened following an internal split. With the increasing French pressure on its activities, the VNQDD leadership resolved to change strategy and forego their clandestine activities for a large-scale open uprising, hoping to expel the French in one wave of attacks. After stockpiling home-made weapons, the VNQDD launched an uprising on February 10, 1930 at Yen Bai. VNQDD forces combined with a mutiny by Vietnamese troops in the French colonial army, in an attempt to spark a widespread revolt against colonial rule. The mutiny was quickly put down by the French authorities and the retribution was heavy. Along with other leading figures, Hoc was captured and executed. The VNQDD was never to regain its strength in Vietnam. Some remaining factions sought peaceful means of struggle, while other groups fled across the border to the Kuomintang bases in Yunnan, where they received arms and training. During the 1930s, the party was eclipsed by Ho Chi Minh's Indochinese Communist Party (ICP). Vietnam was occupied by Japan during the Second World War and in the chaos that followed the Japanese surrender in 1945, the VNQDD and the ICP briefly joined forces in the fight for Vietnamese independence. Ho soon went back on the agreement and purged the VNQDD as his communist-dominated Vietminh soon became unchallenged as the dominant anti-colonial militant organisation. In 1954, Vietnam secured independence after the Battle of Dien Bien Phu and the nation was partitioned. The remnants of the VNQDD fled to the anti-communist south, where they remained until the Fall of Saigon in 1975 saw the Vietnam reunified under communist rule. Today, the party exists only among Overseas Vietnamese.;Hammer, p. 82.;

Genesis
In late 1925, a small group of young Hanoi-based intellectuals, led by a teacher named Pham Tuan Tai and his brother Pham Tuan Lam, created a small publishing house, the Nam Dong Thu Xa (Southeast Asia Publishing House) with the aims of achieving commercial success and promoting revolution to gain Vietnamese independence. To begin with, the organisation focused on editing books and brochures about the Chinese revolution and Sun Yat-sen and on opening a free school to teach quoc ngu (Romanised Vietnamese script) to the working class. The group soon attracted the support of other progressive youths in northern Vietnam, including a group of students and teachers led by Nguyen Thai Hoc. Hoc was a former student at the Commercial School in Hanoi who had been stripped of his scholarship on the official grounds of mediocre academic performance.;Duiker p. 155.;;

Due to harassment by French colonial authorities and censorship of its publications, the Nam Dong Thu Xa was a commercial failure. By the autumn of 1927, the group’s orientation had turned towards politics, and the party gained strength by shifting its appeal to more radical elements in the north. It managed to expand to eighteen cells in fourteen provinces throughout northern and central Vietnam, with a total of around two hundred members.;Duiker, p. 156.;

Formation
Nguyen Thai Hoc, founder and leader of the VNQDD.|thumb
The VNQDD was then formed on December 27, 1927 at a plenary meeting in Hanoi,; led by Hoc. It was a moderate socialist party, and was the first revolutionary party in Vietnam, as it preceded the establishment of the Indochinese Communist Party by three years.; There was considerable debate over the platform and ideology of the party. Many wanted to expand the aim of establishing an independent Vietnamese republic to that of promoting world revolution. There were fears that such an agenda would leave the party open to being accused of being communist, and that it would not maximise the support base among Vietnamese of all ideologies who wanted independence. The final statement was a compromise which stated that

;The aim and general line of the party is to make a national revolution, to use military force to overthrow the feudal colonial system, to set up a democratic republic of Vietnam. At the same time we will help all oppressed nationalities in the work of struggling to achieve independence, in particular such neighboring countries as Laos and Cambodia.;;

Although the VNQDD bore the same name and modelled itself on the Chinese Nationalist Party (Kuomintang or KMT) of Sun Yat-sen and, later, of Chiang Kai-shek, it was not created by the Chinese and had no direct relationship with its Chinese counterpart. It did not gain any notice outside of Vietnam prior to the Yen Bai mutiny.; The, the VNQDD was organized along clandestine lines and was held together with tight discipline in a model similar to the KMT. There were several strata of administrative levels from the basic unit, the cell, up through provincial, regional, and central committees. The plans for revolution were also similar: first there would be a military takeover, then a period of political training of the population before a constitutional government took over.; 

Most of the party members were teachers, French colonial government employees and non-commissioned army officers in the French colonial army. The VNQDD campaigned mainly among these facets of society; there were few worker or peasant members. It also set about seeking alliances with other nationalist factions in Vietnam. In a meeting on July 4, 1928, the Central Committee of the VNQDD appealed for unity among the revolutionary movements of Vietnam, sending delegates to meet with other independence movements. Preliminary contacts were made, but no concrete alliances resulted.;Duiker, p. 157.;

Initial activities
Adding to the difficulties facing the VNQDD were financial problems. Finances were needed to arrange for the setting up of a commercial enterprise which would be used as a front for revolutionaries to meet and plot, as well as for raising funds in itself. As such, a hotel-restaurant, the ''Vietnam Hotel'' was opened in September 1928. The French colonial authorities were aware of the real purpose of the business and put it under surveillance, although no action was taken. The first notable change in the reorganisation of the VNQDD took place in December, when Nguyen Khac Nhu replaced Hoc as the chairman. Three protogovernmental organs were created, to form the legislative, executive and judicial arms of government. The records of the French secret service at the time estimated that by early 1929, the VNQDD consisted of approximately 1500 members in 120 cells, mostly in the area around the Red River Delta. The records showed that most members were students, minor merchants and low level bureaucrats in the French administration. There were some landlords and wealthy peasants, but few were of scholar-gentry (mandarin) rank.;

Beginning in 1928, the VNQDD attracted substantial Vietnamese support as well as the attention of the French colonial administration after a VNQDD death squad killed several French and Vietnamese officials who had gained a reputation for cruelty towards the Vietnamese populace.;Tucker, p. 442.;

Assassination of Bazin


The assassination of Bazin, a French labor recruiter in Hanoi, on February 9, 1929, marked a turning point and the beginning of the decline of the VNQDD in the 1930s. Bazin was a graduate of the École Colonial in Paris, and was a supervisor of labor recruitment in French Indochina. Under the direction of Bazin, Vietnamese foremen were hired to recruit Vietnamese labourers to work on plantations. The working conditions in which the Vietnamese were placed generated indignation. The methods of recruitment often included beating or coercion, as the foreman received a commission for each recruit. The living conditions were poor and the remuneration was low. In response, the hatred of Bazin among Vietnamese led to thoughts of an assassination. A group of workers approached the VNQDD, which had then been in existence for two years, to suggest a revenge killing of Bazin. Hoc, the leader of the VNQDD, felt that assassinations were pointless and that it would only prompt a crackdown by the French Sureté Generale, thereby weakening the party. He felt that it was better to strengthen the party and wait until the time was ripe for an overthrow of the French, whereas he viewed Bazin merely as a twig on the tree of the French colonial administration.;Duiker, pp. 160&amp;ndash;161.;

Having been turned down by the VNQDD leaders, one of the proposers of the assassination, whose membership or lack thereof is unclear, created his own plot. With the help of an accomplice, he shot and killed Bazin as he was leaving the home of his mistress on February 9, 1929. It was the first major attack by the VNQDD. The French authorities reacted by apprehending all known members of the VNQDD that they could track down. The sources disagree, but between three and four hundred men were rounded up. Of those seized, 36 were government clerks, 13 were officials in the French government, 36 were schoolteachers, 39 were merchants, 37 were landowners and 40 were military personnel. Eventually 78 men were convicted and sentenced to between five and twenty years in prison. As a result of the arrests, the VNQDD leadership was severely depleted. Most of the Central Committee were captured, and Hoc and Nhu were among the few who managed to escape from the hideout at the Vietnam Hotel.;

Internal split
In 1929, the party saw an internal split as a dissident faction led by Nguyen The Nghiep began to disobey party orders. As a result, Nghiep and his followers had been driven from the Central Committee. As a result, some sources reported that Nghiep had formed his own party and began making secret contacts with French authorities. Perturbed by the difficulty with traitors who had betrayed party members to the French following the Bazin assassination, Hoc convened a meeting at the village of Lac Dao along the Gia Lam-Haiphong railway in the summer of 1929 to establish tighter regulations. The meeting also saw a shift in party strategy, when Hoc cited the rising discontent among Vietnamese soldiers in the French colonial army as a reason to launch a general uprising. Moderate leaders in the party cautioned against such a move, believing it to be premature, but Hoc’s stature saw the party shift its orientation towards violent struggle. The plan was the provoke a series of uprisings at military posts around the Red River Delta in early 1930, with partisan VNQDD forces outside the military bases joining in on an attack on the two major northern cities of Hanoi and Haiphong. The leaders agreed to restrict their uprisings to Tonkin, since the party was weak elsewhere.;Duiker, pp. 161&amp;ndash;162.;

For the rest of 1929, the party focused its efforts on the preparation of the revolt. They located and manufactured weapons and stored them in hidden depots. This was hindered by French police activity, and in particular its seizure of arms caches.;Duiker, p. 162.;

Yen Bai Mutiny

At around 01:30 on Monday, February 10, 1930, approximately 40 troops belonging to the Second Battalion of the Fourth ''Régiment de Tirailleurs Tonkinois'' stationed at Yen Bai, reinforced by around 60 civilian members of the VNQDD, attacked their 29 French officers and warrant officers.;Rettig, p. 310.; The plan was for the rebels to split into three groups. One group was to infiltrate the infantry, kill French NCOs in their beds and raise support among Vietnamese troops; a second, which was to include the external VNQDD members, was to fight its way into the post headquarters, while the third group would enter the officers’ quarters.;Duiker, p. 163.; The Frenchmen were caught off guard and five were killed, with three seriously wounded. The mutineers managed to isolate a few more from their men, and even managed to raise the flag of the VNQDD on top of one of the buildings. About two hours later, it became apparent that the badly coordinated uprising had failed, as the remaining 550 native soldiers refused to participate in the mutiny, instead helping to quell the rebellion. In addition, the insurrectionists had failed to liquidate the ''Garde indigène'' post of Yen Bai town and were unable to convince the frightened civilian population to join them in a general revolt. At 07:30, a French Indochinese counterattack scattered the mutineers; two hours later, order was re-established in Yen Bai.;;Rettig, p. 310.;

On the same evening, there were two more failed VNQDD insurrectionary attempts in the Son Duong sector. A raid on the ''Garde indigène'' post in Hung Hoa was repelled by the Vietnamese guards of the French Indochinese army who had apparently been tipped off about the insurrection. In the nearby town of Kinh Khe, the instructor, Nguyen Quang Kinh, and one of his wives were slain by VNQDD members in an apparent revenge killing. After the destruction of the ''Garde indigène'' post in Lam Thao, the VNQDD briefly seized control of the district seat. At sunrise, a newly-arrived ''Garde indigène'' unit inflicted a heavy loss on the insurgent group, mortally wounding Nguyen Khac Nhu, one of the main leaders of the VNQDD.;Rettig, p. 311.; Aware of what had happened in the upper delta region, Chinh abandoned plans for an attack on the Son Tay garrison and fled, but he was captured a few days later by French authorities.;

A few further violent incidents occurred until February 22, when Governor-General Pierre Pasquier declared that the insurrection had been defeated. On February 10, a policeman was injured by a VNQDD member at a checkpoint in Hanoi; at night, arts students pelted government buildings with bombs. The buildings were targeted because they symbolised what the students regarded as the colonial state’s repressive power. On the night of February 15 and the early morning of February 16, the nearby villages of Phu Duc in Thai Binh province and Vinh Bao in Hai Duong province were seized for a few hours by the leader of the VNQDD, Hoc, and his remaining forces; in the second village, the local mandarin of the French colonial government, Tri Huyen, was murdered. On February 16, French warplanes responded by bombarding the VNQDD’s last base, Co Am village; on the same day, Tonkin’s Resident Superior René Robin, ordered a mopping-up operation involving two hundred ''Gardes indigènes'', eight French commanders and two Sûreté inspectors. The insurrection was officially declared over on February 22, after Hoc and his lieutenants, Pho Duc Chinh and Nguyen Thanh Loi, were apprehended.;

The largest number of death penalties were handed down by the first Criminal Commission, which had convened at Yen Bai to try those implicated in the mutiny and nearby insurrections. Among the 87 people found guilty at Yen Bai, 46 were servicemen. Some of them defended themselves on the grounds that they had been &quot;surprised and forced to take part in the insurrection&quot;. Of the 87 convicted, 39 were sentenced to death, five to deportation, 33 to life sentences of forced labour, nine to 20 years imprisonment, and one to five years of forced labour. Among those condemned to death, 24 were civilians and 15 were servicemen.;Rettig, p. 316.; Presidential pardons reduced the quantity of death penalties pronounced at Yen Bai from 39 to 13. Among the 13 who were guillotined on June 17, 1930 were the top VNQDD leaders, Hoc and Chinh.; The condemned men cried &quot;Viet Nam!&quot; as they were to be executed.; Hoc made a last plea to the French in the form of a letter. In it, he claimed that he had always wanted to cooperate with the authorities, but that French intransigence had forced him to revolt. He contended that if France wanted to stay in Indochina, then it would have to drop policies that he termed as brutal, and become more amiable towards Vietnamese people. He called for the introduction of universal education, training in commerce and industry and an end to the corruption of the French-installed mandarins.;Duiker, p. 164.;

Exile in Yunnan
After the failure of the Yen Bai uprising, the moderate Le Huu Canh, who had tried to stall the attempted mutiny, attempted to reunited the remnants of the party under the ideology of peaceful reform. Other factions attempted to carry on the legacy of Hoc and recreated the movement in the Hanoi-Haiphong area. After a failed assassination attempt on Governor-General Pasquier, they were repressed in 1931 and 1932. The survivors escaped to Yunnan in southern China where some elements under Nghiep were still active.; The Yunnan VNQDD was in fact a section of the Chinese Kuomintang which protected VNQDD members from the Chinese government while funds were raised by robbery and extortion along the Sino-Vietnamese border. This led to a Chinese crackdown on such activities within Chinese territory, but VNQDD members continued to be trained at the Yunnan Military School; some enlisted in the Chinese army while others learned to manufacture weapons and munitions in the Yunnan arsenal.;
Following the Yen Bai mutiny, the VNQDD went into exile in China, merging with some followers of Phan Boi Chau.
Nghiep had been briefly jailed by Chinese authorities in Yunnan, but he managed to continue running the party from his prison cell. When he was released in 1933, he arranged for a consolidation of the party and similar groups in the area, including some followers of Phan Boi Chau who had formed their own Canton-based VNQDD in 1925. Chau’s group had made this move in opposition to the communist tendencies of Ho Chi Minh’s Revolutionary Youth Association. With Chinese aid, Chau's group had once tried to set up a League of Oppressed Oriental Peoples which had ended in failure. In 1932 it went to the point of declaring a &quot;Provisional Indochinese Government&quot; at Canton.;Hammer, p. 84.; In July 1933, Chau’s group was integrated into Nghiep’s organization in Yunnan. In 1935, Nghiep surrendered to the French consulate in Shanghai. The remainder of the VNQDD was paralysed by factional disputes and was only moderately active up until the outbreak of the Second World War. They attempted to organise workers along the Yunnan railway, threatening to make occasional border assaults, with little success. The VNQDD ceased to exist as a meaningful political organisation.;Duiker, p. 165.;

The VNQDD came to be overshadowed as the leading Vietnamese independence organization by the Indochinese Communist Party of Ho Chi Minh, who later led Vietnam to independence. In 1940, Ho arrived in Yunnan, then a hotbed of both ICP and VNQDD activity. He began to initiate collaboration between the ICP and other nationalist groups such as the VNQDD. At the time, the Second World War had erupted and Japan had replaced the French in Vietnam and had also conquered most of the eastern half of China towards the coast. Ho then shifted to the neighbouring province of Guangxi to the east, where Chinese military leaders had been attempting to use Vietnamese nationalists against the Japanese. The VNQDD had been active there and some of their members had joined the KMT army. Under the umbrella of KMT activities, a broad united alliance of nationalists emerged. With Ho at the forefront, the Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh Hoi (Vietnamese Independence League, often simply known as the Dong Minh Hoi) was formed and based in the town of Chinghsi. The pro-VNQDD nationalist Ho Ngoc Lam was deputy to Pham Van Dong, later to be Ho’s Prime Minister. The front later broadened and was renamed the Viet Nam Giai Phong Dong Minh (Vietnam Liberation League). The cooperation in the border area lasted for only a few months before VNQDD officials complained to the local KMT officials that the communists, led by Dong and Vo Nguyen Giap, were attempting to take over the League. This resulted in the shutting down of the front’s activities by the local authorities.;Duiker, pp. 272&amp;ndash;273.;

Post World War II

Image:Hồ Chí Minh Official Picture.jpg|thumb|The VNQDD vied with the Vietminh of Ho Chi Minh as Vietnam sought independence.
In August 1945, the communist-dominated Vietminh of Ho Chi Minh seized power after the withdrawal of Imperial Japan from Vietnam. Japan had occupied the country and taken control during the Second World War after France had been defeated in Europe. The Vietminh set up a provisional government. This violated an agreement between the member parties of the Viet Nam Cach Mang Dong Minh Hoi (Vietnamese Revolutionary League) which included the Vietminh and the VNQDD. The VNQDD was now led by Nguyen Tuong Tam. Pressure was put on Ho to included them in his government in order to broaden its appeal.;Hammer, p .139.; After the seizure of power, hundreds of VNQDD members returned from exile in China, only to be killed by the Vietminh when they attempted to cross the border. Nationalist China backed the VNQDD in the hope of gaining more influence over its southern neighbour. Ho tried to broaden his support in order to strengthen himself as well as to close out Chinese and French power. Nevertheless, the VNQDD arrived in northern Vietnam with arms and supplies from the KMT, in addition to its prestige as a Vietnamese nationalist organisation. The VNQDD dominated the main control lines between northern Vietnam and China near Lao Cay.; They funded their operations from the tribute they levied from the local populace.;Hammer, p. 140.; Once most of the non-communist nationalists had returned to Vietnam from China, the VNQDD formed an alliance with them in opposition to the Vietminh. Armed confrontations between the Vietminh and the nationalists occurred regularly in the major cities of North Vietnam.; Elections were scheduled by Ho for December 23, and he had made a deal with the VNQDD and the Dong Minh Hoi, assuring them of 50 and 20 seats in the new national assembly respectively, regardless of the election results. This only temporarily placated the VNQDD, which continued in its skirmishes with the Vietminh. Eventually, Chinese pressure on the VNQDD and the Dong Minh Hoi saw them accept a coalition government, in which the VNQDD leader Tam became the foreign minister.;Hammer, p. 144.;

War against French colonial rule


After the March 6, 1946 Ho-Sainteny agreement which saw the return of French colonial forces to Vietnam and the withdrawal of the Chinese, the nationalists found themselves under attack from the French as well. The French forces helped to encircle VNQDD strongholds to allow the Vietminh to attack them. When the Chinese troops who were supposed to be helping to maintain order after the collapse of the Japanese administration after the end of the Second World War left, General Giap of the Vietminh took the opportunity to openly turn on the VNQDD. Giap’s army hunted down the VNQDD troops and cleared them out of the Red River Delta; arms were seized and party members were arrested and charged with crimes ranging from counterfeiting to unlawful possession of arms.;Hammer, p. 176.; Thousands of VNQDD members and other nationalists were massacred by the Vietminh in a large scale purge. The survivors fled mainly to China or French-controlled areas in Vietnam.; When the National Assembly convened on October 28 in Hanoi, only thirty of the fifty VNQDD seats were filled. Of the 37 VNQDD and Dong Minh Hoi members who turned up at the session, only twenty were left by the time it ended.;Hammer, p. 178.; By the end of the year, Tam had fled to China and no longer held the post of Foreign Minister. The VNQDD only had one of their original three representatives left in the cabinet.;Hammer, p. 181.;

Post-independence
Image:Ngo_Dinh_Diem_-_Thumbnail_-_ARC_542189.gif|thumb|90px|left|Ngo Dinh Diem

After the independence of Vietnam was achieved in 1954, the Geneva Accords saw the partition of Vietnam into a communist north and anti-communist south. Under the stipulations of the Geneva Accords, there were to be 300 days of free passage between the two zones. During Operation Passage to Freedom, most VNQDD members from northern Vietnam moved into the South. The VNQDD was deeply divided after years of communist pressure and lacked strong leadership. They were kept in disarray by the autocratic rule of President Ngo Dinh Diem and many members were imprisoned. After the Fall of Saigon at the end of the Vietnam War, the remnants of the VNQDD were again persecuted by the victorious communists. Some VNQDD members found refuge in the West and have continued with their political activities. It remains respected among some sections of overseas Vietnamese community as the leading anti-communist force.;Tucker, p. 443.;

Notes


References
*
*
*
*

External links
*[http://www.vietquoc.com/ Viet Quoc official home page]

Category:Political parties in Vietnam
Category:1927 establishments
Category:Vietnamese anti-communists
Category:Vietnamese revolutionaries
Category:Overseas Vietnamese organizations

vi:Việt Nam Quốc dân đảng
zh:越南國民黨