&amp;nbsp;Sri Venkateswara Creations;&amp;nbsp;RK Films Distributors;; |
released = 9 August, 2006;;|
runtime= 170 min|
country=India |
language = Telugu |
budget = 6 crores |
imdb_id= 0843326 |
}}
''Bommarillu'' (Telugu: }}, English: A toy-house) is a 2006 Telugu musical and romantic film which was directed and co-written by Bhaskar while Dil Raju produced the film. While Siddharth Narayan and Genelia D'Souza played the lead roles, Prakash Raj and Jayasudha, prominent actors from the south Indian film industry, played the significant roles of one of the lead character's parents in the movie. Owing to its box office success, it is being remade in the yet to be released Tamil film, ''Santosh Subramaniam''.;;;; Jayasudha's efforts to remake this film in Hindi with Amitabh Bachchan and Abhishek Bachchan, popular actors from the Bollywood, were unsuccessful. ;;;;

The film primarily revolves around a father and son relationship with the father's dote on his son ironically leaving a bitter taste with the latter. The son's choices and his wants to achieve something in life are always subdued by his father's. The father has a justification in the form of his dream, that is to build a dream house - ''Bommarillu''. When it comes to his son's marriage, the son breaks his shackles of respect only to experience the newly found independence. The film concludes with the father's repentance on his foolishness and the happy marriage of the protagonists. 

The film opened to the Indian audiences on 9 August, 2006. On its way to winning accolades and rave reviews, the film went on to win the Filmfare Awards;; among other prominent awards. The film's success broke several records at the box office during its prime.;;

Plot
Blossoming love between Hasini and SiddhuThe film begins with a baby taking his initial steps on a beach while the father is supporting him. The narrator in the background (Murali Mohan) states that, it is right for a father to support his child in his infancy, but questions whether the father should continue to hold the child’s hand even after he is 24 years old. As the credits roll, a visibly angry Siddhu (Siddharth) begins uttering abuses at all the fathers in the world. When inquired about his disgust, he says that his father, Aravind (Prakash Raj), gives him more than what he asks for. He cites instances where his choices of dressing, hairdo and many others are stashed away by his father’s. However, he vows that the two things that will be of his choice would be, his career and the woman he would marry.

Post-credits, Satti (Sunil), the Arvind dutiful household’s servant wakes up Siddhu in the morning. In the background, we see Siddhu’s mother, Lakshmi (Jayasudha) singing a devotional Telugu song while cooking. At the dining table, Arvind, Managing Director of their construction company, inquires if Siddhu will join their office for managing their business. When Siddhu deliberates, his father doesn’t stand any longer and instead plans for his marriage despite Siddhu's silent protest. The next week, he returns home to realize that he is going to get engaged to Subbulakshmi (Neha) against his wishes. He speaks with her only to realize that she is a ''daddy’s girl'' (Tanikella Bharani being the father) and she not being to his liking. However, with Arvind’s final say, they eventually get engaged. 

Arvind, Siddhu and Lakshmi listen while Hasini tells the family why she's leaving the houseWhile contemplating on his options in a temple, Siddhu accidentally meets Hasini (Genelia D'Souza), an engineering student. Seeing her chirpy nature and vibrance, Siddhu begins to like her. He makes attempts to know her by meeting her on a regular basis. In the process, he starts liking her cherubic and ever-friendly nature and as someone who does what she loves. As days go by, he realizes about so many small things in her company that gave him happiness. He realizes that he has fallen in love with her. 

Alongside this, Siddhu applies for a bank loan to start out on his dream of building his career. When his love for Hasini deepens, he wishes to propose to her. He confesses to her that he is engaged to get married to Subbulakshmi against his wishes, but what he really wants is her. On knowing of him being engaged, Hasini gets dejected, but comes back a day later and asks him to do what he wishes for and accepts his proposal. At this juncture, the ecstatic Siddhu is seen by a furious Arvind. Siddhu is admonished back home and he expresses his disinterest in marriage with Subbulakshmi. When asked for his reason to like Hasini, Siddhu replies saying that if Hasini can stay with their family for a week, then all their questions shall be answered. He convinces Hasini to stay at his house after seeking permission from her father, Kanaka Rao (Kota Srinivasa Rao).

Siddhu's confrontation with Arvind about his choices and wantsWhen Hasini is introduced to Siddhu’s family, she gets a lukewarm welcome. As she settles down in the house, one after the other begins to like her. Even though getting used to the living habits of the authoritarian Arvind's household was difficult, Hasini stayed put for Siddhu's sake. In the meanwhile, Arvind reprimands Siddhu when he knows of his bank loan and his plans, only to further enrage Siddhu. One day the entire family along with Hasini attends a marriage ceremony. A cheerful Hasini cheers up the ceremony with her playful nature. Coincidentally, Kanaka Rao who happens to be around, recognizes Siddhu as the drunken young man whom he encountered on an earlier occasion. Hasini realizes her father's presence and quickly exits to avoid his attention. After saving their grace, Siddhu admonishes Hasini for her antics at the marriage. A sad and angry Hasini moves out of the house saying that she does not find Siddhu the same and that she cannot put on an act if she stays in their house. After getting back to her house, she rebuilds the trust her father has in her while Siddhu is left forlorn. Lakshmi confronts Arvind on Siddhu’s choices and wants. In the process, Siddhu opens up his heart and leaving Arvind to repent on his foolishness. Siddhu requests Subbulakshmi and her parents to call off the impending marriage. While they relent, Arvind manages to convince Kanaka Rao about Siddhu and Hasini's marriage. In return, Kanaka Rao wants to know more about Siddhu by having him live in house for a week. Arvind agrees with this and as the story returns to the pre-credits scene, the viewers are left to assume about the happy marriage of the protagonists.

Cast
* Siddharth Narayan as Siddu. A well-disciplined young man with dreams of achieving something big of his own. The child in his heart is released when he gets to know ''Hasini''.
* Genelia D'Souza as Hasini. A very vibrant, effervescent and a happy-go-lucky young woman who loves to live life to the fullest. Her infectious vivacity presents ''Siddu'' with a whole new world of liveliness and independence. 
* Prakash Raj as Aravind (Siddu's dad). A father who visions of a happy and dream house after several years of toil. Everything for him should be like a picture that fills the jigsaw. This steals the house members, especially ''Siddu'', of their individual persona and sheen. 
* Kota Srinivasa Rao as Kanaka Rao (Hasini's dad). A loving father to ''Hasini'' with a severe habit of drinking.
* Jayasudha as Lakshmi (Siddu's mom). A loving mother to ''Siddu'' who is instrumental in making her husband realize of his folly.
* Sunil as Satti (Servant). A comic character who plays the dutiful servant in ''Aravind's'' house. His humorous punchline being ''Satti...Oka manchi panodu'' (English: Satti...One good servant).
* Neha as Subbulaxmi. Plays the fiancé of ''Siddu'' until he breaks the engagement after he decides to marry ''Hasini''.
* Ravi Varma as Ravi. Plays the friend of ''Siddu''
* Dharmavarapu Subramanyam as Kismat Kumar. Plays as the Professor at Siddhu and Hasini's engineering school. Another comic relief.

Production
= The key elements=
Hasini and Siddhu dancing to a duet at the film's sets, Ramanaidu StudiosThe entire production of the movie took about three and a half months to be completed.;; Prior to ''Bommarillu'', Bhaskar assisted Dil Raju in Telugu movies such as ''Arya (2004)'' and ''Bhadra (2005)''. 

On the sets of the film ''Arya'', Raju offered Bhaskar a movie to direct. Eventually on the sets of ''Bhadra'', Bhaskar narrated the story to Raju and the saga began.;; Thus, ''Bommarillu'' became the first directorial venture for Bhaskar.;; In an interview, he said that the story for the film began taking shape in as early as 1997 when he wrote about a father and a son's relationship. However, when the plans of making the film arose, an element of love between the protagonists was added. In the interview, he said that the script, up to and extent, is autobiographical.;; He cites personal examples of some scenes from the movie such as the choice of clothes for ''Siddhu'' by ''Arvind'', the head-bump between the lead actors and ''Lakshmi'' singing in the kitchen.;;

In an interview, Vijay C Chakravarthy, the eventual cinematographer for the movie, said that Dil Raju offered him the position in November 2005. For the film, Vijay said that he made use of Arriflex 435 camera and Hawk lenses.;; In another interview, Bhaskar said working with Abburi Ravi, his co-writer, was unique. They used to converse in a closed room with a voice recorder, allowing the dialogues in the script to be natural.;; He also heaped praise on Marthand K. Venkatesh, the film's editor. After filming, the length of the movie reel came to 16200 feet which amounted to a runtime of 3 hours and 15 minutes. The presence of Marthand brought this down to 15100 feet. This meant a reduction of the runtime by 25 minutes.;;

= Casting, location and music=
The choice of Siddharth was because of the sheer relevance to the character in real life. However, they finalized the choice of the actor only after the script was ready.;;;; The choice of Genelia was based on her natural vivacity in real life. This and her eyes, according to Bhaskar, made her an obvious choice for her character.;; More so, she liked the one line story that Raju told and also a few scenes that he narrated to her. She immediately liked the character and consented for the role.;; The fact that her co-actor, Siddharth and she acted earlier together in ''Boys (2003)'', made them more comfortable to work with. The camaraderie that the lead actors shared during the filming, added on to their good performances.;;;; The choice of Prakash Raj was easy as he befitted the character he portrayed while, Jayasudha was persuaded to play the role of the lead actor's mother.;;

The palatial house where the entire family stayed in the film is part of Ramanaidu Studios at Nanakramguda, Hyderabad. Several modifications were done by the art director, Prakash.;; A couple of the songs were shot in a montage, another couple in Frankfurt am Main and other places in Germany and one song each in this house set and at a temple in Kakinada.;; 

For the film's music and soundtrack, Raju renewed his previous association (''Arya'' and ''Bhadra'') with Devi Sri Prasad.;; Savitha Reddy rendered the voice for Genelia's character in the movie.;; A feature of this film is Siddharth singing one of the tracks from the film.;;;;

Release
= Reception=
Bommarillu was released worldwide with 72 reels of the film's print. Owing to the success of the film, the number of reels grew to about hundred.;; Released with a &quot;U&quot; (Universal: Suitable for all ages) certification by the Central Board of Film Certification of India;;, it was estimated that the film garnered about Rs. 5 crores (50 million) in India.;; The film completed 50 days of screening in the theaters in the state of Andhra Pradesh.;; In local parlance, this is considered to be one of the measures for a film's success. The reception in the United States was equally impressive. Released in six major metropolises, the film collected $73,200 (then approximately Rs. 3 million) within the first four days of screening.;; A September 2006 survey done in the United States by a popular entertainment portal revealed that the film was watched by an Indian expatriate population of 65,000, which generated a revenue of Rs. 30 million at that time.;; A cumulative gross revenue for the film in India was reported to be as Rs. 35 million.;;

= Critical acclaim, controversies, awards=
The film received rave reviews right from the story to the performances of the actors. One entertainment portal has given a rating of 4.5/5 tagging the film's review with - ''Picture Perfect''.;; Another such portal suggests the movie to the entire family. It goes on to applaud Siddharth Narayan, Genelia D'Souza and Prakash Raj, the three prime actors from the film for their performances.;; Similar reviews were voiced out by other such portals, many of which pointing out no real flaws from the film. ;;;;;;

The film had its own share of controversies. A news report showcased the omnipresent piracy in the Telugu film industry by quoting the cheap prices at which the movie was being sold.;; The film's lead actor, Siddharth even went on to request the audiences to buy the original audio CD.;; The film's producer, Dil Raju ensured a special code on each distributed print to track piracy with a warning for copyright violation which would incur a fine or a jail term. ;;

In April 2007, a case of copyright infringement was filed on the film's producer and director that prompted a court to stall the screening of the movie. The allegation pointed out that the film was made based on a compilation of short stories that was released in 1997.;;

At the annual Filmfare Awards for South Indian cinema, the film won awards for the Best Film, Best Actress in a leading role and the Best Director.;;

DVD &amp; Soundtrack
Bommarillu DVD Cover
= DVD=
The DVD version of the film was released on June 4, 2007.;; 
This DVD release was distributed by ''RK Films distributors'' all around the world, but for India.;; It is available in Aspect ratio (image)#16:9 standard|16:9 Anamorphic widescreen, Dolby Digital#Dolby Digital Surround EX|Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround, progressive 24 FPS, widescreen and NTSC format.;;;;

= Soundtrack=
The film has seven songs composed by Devi Sri Prasad with the lyrics primarily penned by Chandrabose, Ravi Kumar Bhaskarabhatla, Kulasekhar and Sirivennela Sitaramasastri.;;;; The audio of the film released nationwide on July 18, 2006.;; A repository of Indian songs has recommended the feel-good soundtracks to the audiences.;;

* We have a Romeo sung by Ranjith &amp; Andrea. A peppy and youthful song where Siddhu and his friends are searching for Siddhu's ''Juliet''. 

* Bommani Geesthe sung by Gopika Poornima &amp; Jeans Srinivas. A romantic musical interlude between the lead characters.

* Kaani Ippudu sung by Devi Sri Prasad. A fun song which talks about the lead characters falling in love for the first time.

* Music Bit sung by Sumangali. An interlude with humming in between. This track is heard for a few times during the film.

* Laloo Darwaja sung by Naveen, Murali, and Priya Prakash. A high energy song sung by the entire Arvind family at a marriage function. It contains the film's tagline in the lyrics as well.

* Nammaka Thappani sung by Sagar &amp; Sumangali. A romantic track which is both energetic and melancholy. It speaks of the estranged love between the lead characters.

* Appudo Ippudo - Siddharth Narayan. Another youthful song where the lead actor expressing his exuberance.

External links
*
* [http://musicmazaa.com/telugu/lyrics/movie/Bommarillu.html Lyrics Of Bommarillu] Lyrics and Songs On MusicMazaa.com

References


Category:2006 films
Category:Telugu-language films
Category:Indian films
Category:Directorial debut films
Category:Romantic musical films

ta:பொமரில்லு