
| Prev =Patriot Games
| Next =Sibling Rivalry
}}

“I Take Thee Quagmire” is the twenty-first episode of season four of ''Family Guy'', originally broadcast on 12 March, 2006.;; Guests on the episode included Adam West, Nicole Sullivan and Danny Smith.;com&quot;>;; The plot follows Peter being a contestant on ''Wheel of Fortune'', and thus winning himself free maid service for a week. Uponfirst meeting her, Quagmire instantly becomes attracted to her, this eventually leading him to propose marriage, which she accepts. The couple are married, much to Peter's dismay; however, Quagmire begins to have seconds thoughts, but is shocked when Joan, his new wife, threatens to self-harm herself if he leaves her, so he fakes his own death, with aid from Peter.Stewie is annoyed at Lois's decision not to breastfeed him anymore.;; Several scenes were censored for television broadcasting. The episode received little reception, with one positive comment from ''IGN''.

Plot
Peter is a contestant on ''Wheel of Fortune'' and wins. He chooses the prize of one week of free maid service. When his maid Joan arrives, Peter has her pull items out of his belly button, and rides her back to the store. Quagmire meets Joan at the Griffin household. While alone outside, he announces he is in love with her. Peter decides to over-work Joan on her last night by giving Meg a watermelon, which explodes in her face. After dating Joan, Quagmire proposes marriage to her, which she accepts and the couple prepares their marriage ceremony. Lois, Peter and their neighbors visit Quagmire's house, finding that he has changed his personality significantly. Peter still believes this to be a prank and shows Quagmire porn magazines in an attempt to change him back to his former ways. Lois begins to question whether she should breastfeed Stewie any longer, as he is hurting her when feeding.

Lois discovers her bra size has largely increased, thus making her clothes break. Peter accidentally spills wine on her and shakes her boobs dry, both these incidents make Quagmire realize he has made a mistake by marrying Joan. He informs Joan that some of his friends think they should get a divorce after discussing it with Peter, Joe and Cleveland, but she threatens to Self-injury|cut herself if he divorced her. As a result, Peter decides to help Quagmire fake his death. He shows Joan a video of Quagmire being attacked by a ninja, Nazi's, a 'pots and pans' robot, and the body being consumed by a dinosaur held by Peter. Joan is unconvinced by the video. Peter and his friends operate plan B; which consists of Quagmire pretending to suffer a heart attack and dying. Quagmire is buried in a coffin with enough oxygen to last him a short period of time so Peter can return after the funeral has finished and dig him up. However, when Mayor West announces all coffins must be buried in concrete, Peter exclaims he is not dead, and brings Quagmire out of the coffin, alive. Death shows up to retrieve his body. After plea for Quagmire's life, Death ends up taking his Joan instead, as she was suicidal. Lois allows Stewie to be breastfeed again, thus delighting him;;

Production
This episode is one of the first to begin with a scene which is not the Griffin family household or the town center. It starts by depicting the game show ''Wheel of Fortune''.;; When Brian is watching ''Malcolm in the Middle'' on television, a scene begins showing the mother of the fictional family screaming at the children and father. Jane Kaczmarek was asked to do the voice as she was the original actor in the series, however she refused. MacFarlane said that he gets a message that Kaczmarek wishes to portray that character as likable, and does not wish to jeopardize that.;; The father during that scene was voiced by Bryan Cranston, the original actor in the series, who accepted the role.; Seth MacFarlane comments that &quot;this is the first real Quagmire story we've ever done.&quot;; A scene was made of Stewie attending a meeting similar to those at Alcoholics Anonymous, however the meeting was designed for those who are too addicted to breast milk.; The format of ''Wheel of Fortune'' is somewhat similar to the layout of the modern-day program, however the scene also features several aspects which are now no longer broadcast, and were featured in the 1980s.;

Censorship
Two scenes during this episode were censored for television broadcasting. When Quagmire meets Joan and invites her out on a date, Cleveland states &quot;is that a banana in your pocket, or an erection in your pocket;&quot; although this entire scene was not censored, Fox Broadcasting Company bleeped &quot;erection&quot;.;; When Peter is promoting 'Crystal Pepsi', this scene was only shown on the DVD, as it is prohibited to promote one product over another on television.;

Cultural references
When Mayor West is playing as a contestant on ''Jeopardy!'', he spells the name of the host, Alex Trebek backwards, thus sending him back to the fifth dimension. This is a reference to former animated comedy series: ''Super Friends''.; When Peter and the children are flying through space and singing, this references ''The Great Space Coaster''.; The two Asian men who meet Peter at the traffic lights when riding Joan's back speak in a very similar tone to Howard Cossell, a reference to 1985 cult film ''Better Off Dead''.;;; When Quagmire fantasises about being alone in the forest with Joan and speaking to her in Elvish, this references a scene from ''Lord of the Rings''.;;

Reception
This episode received little reception, however ''IGN's'' Michael Drucker commented that &quot;the Volume four episodes are easily funnier than the volume three ones&quot;, this referring to the episode.;[http://uk.dvd.ign.com/articles/744/744835p1.html Family Guy - Volume Four], Drucker, Michael. Retrieved on 2007-12-26;

References


External links



*
*[http://www.tv.com/family-guy/i-take-thee-quagmire/episode/639910/summary.html &quot;I Take Thee Quagmire&quot;] at TV.com
*[http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0772467/ &quot;I Take Thee Quagmire&quot;] at the Internet Movie Database

Category:Family Guy episodes: Season 4