


''Goldfinger'', released in 1964, is the third James Bond film, as well as the third to star Sean Connery as MI6 agent James Bond. It is based on the novel of the same name by Ian Fleming. The film also stars Honor Blackman and Gert Fröbe. The film was produced by Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman, and was the first of four Bond films directed by Guy Hamilton. 

The film is generally regarded as the first official Bond blockbuster as well as being the template for all future Bond films; it is usually credited with triggering what is known as the &quot;James Bond craze&quot;.; The film made cinematic history when it recaptured its production costs in record-setting time, despite a budget equal to that of the two preceding films combined. ''Goldfinger'' was also the first Bond film to use a pop star to sing the theme song during the titles, which would follow for every Bond film since except ''On Her Majesty's Secret Service''.;

Plot
In the pre-title sequence, James Bond destroys a Mexican drug lord's base with plastic explosives, and defeats an assassin sent to kill him by throwing him into a bath of water and knocking in a domestic heater to electrocute him; as he walks away Bond murmurs &quot;shocking...positively shocking&quot;. The main story begins in Miami Beach, Florida, USA, with CIA agent Felix Leiter delivering a message to Bond from M to watch Auric Goldfinger (Gert Fröbe). Bond foils Goldfinger's cheating at gin rummy, by distracting his employee, Jill Masterson. Afterblackmailing Goldfinger into losing, Bond and Jill consummate their new relationship in Bond's hotel suite. Bond is knocked out by Goldfinger's Korean manservant Oddjob, while Jill is covered from head to toe in gold paint and succumbs to epidermal suffocation.

In London, Bond learns that his true mission is determining how Goldfinger transports gold internationally. He plays a high-stakes golf game with his adversary; both men cheat (Goldfinger cheats first), but Bond is better at it and wins. Goldfinger warns Bond to stay out of his business by having Oddjob decapitate a statue with his steel-rimmed top hat, throwing it in the same manner as a Frisbee. Undeterred, Bond follows him to Switzerland, where he unintentionally foils an attempt by Jill's sister Tilly Masterson to shoot Goldfinger.

Bond sneaks into Goldfinger's plant and overhears him talking to a Red Chinese agent about &quot;Operation Grand Slam.&quot; Leaving, he encounters Tilly as she is about to make a second attempt on Goldfinger's life, but accidentally trips an alarm. During their unsuccessful attempt to escape, Tilly is killed when Oddjob breaks her neck with his hat. Goldfinger has Bond tied to a gold table underneath an industrial laser, which slowly begins to slice the table in half. But Bond lies to Goldfinger that British Intelligence knows about Grand Slam, causing Goldfinger to spare Bond's life until he can determine how much the spy actually knows.

Bond is transported via a private aircraft flown by Goldfinger's personal pilot, Pussy Galore (Honor Blackman), to Goldfinger's Kentucky stud farm, near Fort Knox. He escapes and witnesses Goldfinger meeting U.S. mafiosi, who have brought the materials he needs for Operation Grand Slam. Bond is recaptured, but has learned enough to deduce that Goldfinger intends to irradiate the U.S. gold supply stored at the United States Bullion Depository at Fort Knox with an &quot;atomic device&quot; so as to render it useless for almost 60 years, thereby greatly increasing the value of his own considerable gold holdings.

Goldfinger about to slice Bond in half with a laser.

Operation Grand Slam begins with the women pilots of Galore's Flying Circus spraying lethal nerve gas over Fort Knox to dispatch its garrison, though Goldfinger had told Galore that the soldiers would just be rendered unconscious. However, Bond had earlier seduced her and persuaded her to contact the CIA, who had then replaced the poison with a harmless gas. Informed about this, the military personnel of Fort Knox convincingly play dead. Goldfinger's Chinese agents gain entry to the vault. Bond is then handcuffed to the atomic device and lowered into the vault with it. Goldfinger's forces are surrounded by Army personnel and wiped out; but, disguised as a US colonel, Goldfinger escapes. In the vault, Bond unlocks his handcuffs, kills Oddjob, and vainly tries to deactivate the atomic device till a specialist, who had been accompanying Leiter, runs in and stops the countdown at seven seconds; the timer indicates &quot;007&quot;.

With Fort Knox safe, the American President invites Bond to the White House to thank him. Bond boards a Lockheed JetStar for Washington D.C., but it is hijacked by Goldfinger. Bond and Goldfinger struggle for the latter's revolver; and the revolver fires, shattering a window; Goldfinger is blown out. Bond rescues the pilot Galore, and they parachute safely onto a beach.

Cast

Harold Sakata as Oddjob (left) and Gert Fröbe as Goldfinger (right)
Honor Blackman as Pussy Galore
*Sean Connery as James Bond (007): A British agent who is sent to investigate Auric Goldfinger. Connery reprised the role for the third time in a row.
*Honor Blackman as Pussy Galore: Goldfinger's personal pilot and leader of an all-female team of pilots known as the Flying Circus. Honor Blackman was selected for the female leading role of Pussy Galore partially due to her fame from her role on ''The Avengers''.; Concerned about censors, the film's producers thought about changing the character's name to &quot;Kitty Galore&quot;.;; They kept the original name when British newspapers began to refer to Honor Blackman as &quot;Pussy&quot; in the lead up to production. Pussy's name is actually connected to her leadership of a circus group of cat-burglar, cat-women, Amazon lesbian acrobats (called &quot;abrocats&quot;) in the novel, but that is only insinuated in the screen adaptation. During promotion, Blackman took delight in embarrassing interviewers by repeatedly mentioning the character's name.;
*Gert Fröbe as Auric Goldfinger: A wealthy man obsessed with gold. Gert Fröbe was chosen to portray the villain Auric Goldfinger because producers Saltzman and Broccoli had seen his performance as a psychopathic child molester in a German film.; Since Fröbe spoke English with a thick accent, his performance was dubbed over with the voice of actor Michael Collins.; Theodore Bikel auditioned for the part.;;
*Harold Sakata as Oddjob: Goldfinger's lethal Korean manservant. Director Guy Hamilton had seen Olympic silver medalist weight lifter Harold Sakata on a wrestling program and immediately had Sakata in mind for the role of Oddjob.;
*Shirley Eaton as Jill Masterton: A girl who, using binoculars and a radio, helps Goldfinger cheat at cards.
*Tania Mallet as Tilly Masterson: The sister of Jill Masterson, she is on a vendetta to avenge her sister.
*Bernard Lee as M: 007's boss.
*Cec Linder as Felix Leiter: Bond's CIA liaison in the United States. Jack Lord played the part in ''Dr. No (film)|Dr. No''. Linder was the only actor actually on location in Miami.;
*Lois Maxwell as Miss Moneypenny: M's secretary.
*Desmond Llewelyn as Q: The head of Q-Branch, he supplies 007 with a modified Aston Martin DB5. Guy Hamilton told Llewelyn to inject humour into the role, thus beginning the friendly antagonism that became a hallmark of the series.;

Production
''Goldfinger'' had what was then considered a large budget of $3 million, and was the first James Bond film classified as a box-office blockbuster.;; Richard Maibaum, who had adapted two of Ian Fleming's novels for the first two Bond films &amp;ndash; ''Dr. No (film)|Dr. No'' and ''From Russia With Love'' &amp;ndash; returned to adapt the seventh James Bond novel. However, Harry Saltzman disliked the first draft, and brought in Paul Dehn to revise it. Connery disliked his draft, so Maibaum returned. In addition, Guy Hamilton replaced Terence Young as director. Young, who directed the previous films, decided to direct ''The Amorous Adventures of Moll Flanders'' (1965). Hamilton felt that he needed to make Bond less of a &quot;superman&quot;, and wanted to focus on the villains. The plot was changed from the novel, in which Goldfinger actually attempts to empty Fort Knox. This was apparently a reaction to criticism of the novel: Bond notes in the film it would take twelve days for Goldfinger to steal the gold, before being told that he actually intends to irradiate it.;;

=Filming=
Principal photography on ''Goldfinger'' commenced on 20 January 1964 in Miami, Florida, at the Fontainebleau Hotel.; Sean Connery never travelled to the United States during filming; his entire performance was filmed in Europe &amp;ndash; primarily at Pinewood Studios where portions of the Fontainebleau were recreated in April 1964.; Goldfinger's estate was built at Pinewood.; Ian Fleming visited the set of ''Goldfinger'', but he died a few months later in August 1964 shortly before it was released.;

Several scenes were filmed on location; the golf club scene was shot at Stoke Poges Golf Club in Buckinghamshire in May 1964.; The scene in which Tilly Masterson attempts to snipe Goldfinger was filmed near the Pilatus Aircraft Factory, Stans and Furka pass.;;; The evening car chase in which Bond uses some of the gadgetry of his Aston Martin was filmed at Black Park, Buckinghamshire.; Location filming also included Kentucky and Switzerland, which was edited into the Pinewood shots.;

For security reasons, the filmmakers were not allowed to film inside Fort Knox, though exterior photography was permitted. All sets for the interior of Fort Knox were designed and built from scratch at Pinewood Studios. A letter from the real-life controller of Fort Knox complimented Ken Adam and the production team on their imaginations.; Adam was told by Principal photography was completed in late August 1964.;

=Effects=

Two Aston Martin DB5s were built for production, one of which had no gadgets

The opening credit sequence, as well as the posters for the advertising campaign, were designed by graphic artist Robert Brownjohn. Actress Margaret Nolan, who was featured in the film as Bond's masseuse at the Fontainebleau Hotel, modeled for many of the posters and was also used as the golden woman in the credit sequence.; The same model jet was used for wide shots of Goldfinger's Lockheed Jet Star was refurbished to be used as the presidential plane that crashes at the film's end.;

''Goldfinger'' was the first Bond film with the budget to showcase unique technology that became a staple of the film series.; Production designer Ken Adam worked with special effects supervisor John Stears to overhaul the prototype of the Aston Martin DB5 coupe, Bond's first company car.; Pneumatic mechanics were used to simulate machine guns hidden behind the front turn signals; smokescreen and oil dispensers were fitted behind the rear signal lights (though they had to be removed to emplace a large bulletproof shield in the rear of the vehicle); revolving licence plates were fitted in the front and rear bumpers (a feature developed by the film's director); a tire-slashing apparatus that was meant to extend from a wheel depicted to have been a feature of the actual vehicle, was actually a separate rig filmed in a studio; the front passenger seat was turned into an ejector seat, operated by a compressed air mechanism that could be fired by a hidden button in the gearshift. All of these features were created and installed in the course of six weeks.;

Other features including front and rear projecting overriders for ramming other vehicles, a weapons tray hidden beneath the driver's seat (that has never been seen in a film), a nail chamber fitted behind the rear signal lights to dispense clustered spikes, and a radio telephone concealed behind the driver's door paneling &amp;ndash; were added to the DB5, but were not used in the film.; Two cars were used during production, one which had no gadgets installed. The latter car was eventually furnished with the spy equipment and was used for publicity purposes. It was reused for ''Thunderball''.;

Lasers did not exist in 1959 when the book was written, and they were a novelty in the movie. The Bond set uses a scaled-up prop which visually suggests the original 1960 Theodore H. Maiman ruby-crystal laser, complete with coiled external flashlamp, and the beam is red. However, in the movie the laser beam is continuous, which is never the case with the 1960 flashlamp design. Reportedly the film prop actually used a low-powered helium-neon continuous beam gas laser, but the beam didn't show on the film, so it had to be added as an optical special effect. The effect on the table is simulated by a welder cutting through it from below with an oxyacetylene torch. In the novel, Goldfinger uses a saw to try to kill Bond, but the filmmakers changed it to a laser to make the film feel more fresh.;

=Music=


Shirley Bassey sang the theme song &quot;Goldfinger&quot;, and she would go on to sing the theme songs for two other Bond films as well. The song was composed by John Barry, with lyrics by Anthony Newley and Leslie Bricusse. Newley originally sang the song, but Bassey's recording was used in the film and was featured on the soundtrack. Newley's version was released in the 30th anniversary compilation album ''The Best of Bond...James Bond''. The theme was an international hit single, achieving a spot in the Billboard Hot 100 top five. The album went gold, selling over a million copies in the United States alone; it reached #21 in the UK charts.; The film score was composed by John Barry with the UK soundtrack featuring 4 tracks that didn't appear on the US soundtrack.

Release and reception
''Goldfinger'' was originally released on 17 September, 1964, in the United Kingdom, and on 21 December, 1964, in the United States. ; To promote the film, the two Aston Martin DB5s were showcased at the 1964 World's Fair, and it quickly became dubbed &quot;the most famous car in the world.&quot; Corgi began its decades-long relationship with the Bond franchise, producing a toy of the car. It became the biggest selling toy of 1964.;

The film's $3 million budget was recouped in two weeks, and it broke box office records in multiple countries around the world.; ''Goldfinger'' went on to be included in the ''Guinness Book of World Records'' as the fastest grossing film of all time.; The film grossed a total of $51,081,062 in the United States.;; At the 1965 Academy Awards, Norman Wanstall won the Academy Award for Sound Editing for his work on ''Goldfinger''.;; Composer John Barry was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Score for a Motion Picture. Ken Adam was nominated for the BAFTA for Best British Art Direction.;; The American Film Institute has also honoured the film four times: ranking it No. 90 for AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes|best movie quote (&quot;A martini. Shaken, not stirred.&quot;), No. 53 for AFI's 100 Years... 100 Songs|best song (&quot;Goldfinger&quot;), No. 49 for AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains|best villain (Auric Goldfinger), and No. 71 for AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills|most thrilling film.

''Goldfinger'' was the first James Bond film to be broadcast on U.S. television &amp;ndash; on September 17 1972, by the American Broadcasting Company (ABC).; The film, however, was heavily edited by ABC: the gunbarrel sequence was cut out, scenes of violence and sexuality were trimmed down, and the scene in which Oddjob is electrocuted was almost entirely deleted.;; Nonetheless, it garnered the highest Nielsen Ratings of any film broadcast on television at that time: 49 percent of all viewers. The distributor Park Circus Films theatrically re-released ''Goldfinger'' in the UK on 27 July 2007 at one-hundred-and-fifty multiplex cinemas, on digital prints.;;;; The re-release put the film twelfth at the weekly box office.;;

Legacy
''Goldfingers popularity led to the inception of a massive tie-in marketing campaign that spawned a diverse product line including clothing, dress shoes, action figures, board games, jigsaw puzzles, lunch boxes, trading cards, slot cars, and collectible die-cast toy reproductions of Bond's gadget-laden car, an Aston Martin DB5.; Parodies of James Bond appeared in the form of &quot;secret agent&quot; comics, television programs, and a spoof of Ian Fleming's first bond novel ''Casino Royale'' in 1967. The laser scene was also popular and parodied; in ''The Simpsons'', James ''Bont'' (who is modelled after Sean Connery) is strapped to a table and is about to be cut by a laser, and makes his escape, only to be foiled by Homer.;; ''Dexter's Laboratory'' has Dexter on the Photo Finisher, which mirrors the scene from the film.;; The rest of Fleming's Bond novels also gained popularity as a result of the success of ''Goldfinger''.;

An episode of the U.S. television program ''MythBusters'' considered the scenario of an explosive depressurisation in a plane at high altitudes. Their investigation concluded that a sudden depressurisation as depicted in the film would not occur.;; ''Mythbusters'' also twice investigated if death could be caused by full body painting, as was depicted in the film. While this was proved to be possible - likely due to heat stroke and not epidermal suffocation as depicted in the film - it was found that such a death would be very slow, unlike in the film.;;;;

References


External links

*[http://www.mgm.com/title_title.do?title_star=GOLDFING MGM's site on ''Goldfinger'']
*
*
*
*



;
Category:1964 films
Category:British films
Category:English-language films
Category:Films directed by Guy Hamilton
Category:James Bond films
Category:Pinewood films
Category:Films set in Kentucky

;
ar:أصبع الذهب (فيلم)
cs:Goldfinger
da:Goldfinger
de:Goldfinger
es:Goldfinger (película)
fr:Goldfinger
hr:Goldfinger
it:Agente 007 - Missione Goldfinger
he:גולדפינגר
nl:Goldfinger (film)
ja:007 ゴールドフィンガー
no:Goldfinger (film)
pl:Goldfinger (film)
pt:Goldfinger (filme)
ru:Голдфингер (фильм)
simple:Goldfinger
sk:Goldfinger (film)
sr:Голдфингер
fi:007 ja Kultasormi
sv:Goldfinger
th:จอมมฤตยู 007
tr:Altın Parmak (film)