

Hurricane Danny was the fourth tropical storm and second hurricane of the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season. Forming from a tropical wave at a high latitude on July 16, Danny initially was not expected to strengthen past minimal storm intensity. However, as the storm followed a large loop-like path over the north Atlantic Ocean, it reached hurricane intensity on July 19 at an unusually high latitude and in an area of higher than normal pressures. After maintaining its strength for 24 hours, the convection quickly diminished as the storm moved over cooler water temperatures, and Danny degenerated to a remnant area of low pressure. The system turned to the southwest and west, and it dissipated on July 27 630 miles (1015 km) east of where the storm originally formed. Danny did not affect land. 

Storm history

A large and well-organized tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on July 9. Due to cooler waters the wave weakened as it tracked northwestward, and by the next day it was devoid of deep convection. On July 13, deep convection developed near a mid-level circulation along the wave vorticy, and the convection slowly organized and increased over the following days. Dvorak classifications began late on July 15, and based satellite imagery and ship reports of a closed surface circulation, the system developed into Tropical Depression Five on July 16 about 630 miles (1015 km) east of Bermuda.;;

The depression quickly developed outer banding features as the convection organized, and the system strengthened into Tropical Storm Danny early on July 17. The storm moved steadily northwestward around the edge of the Bermuda-Azores High pressure area in the central Atlantic Ocean, and as it moved around its periphery its motion turned to the northeast on July 18. Despite being at a high latitude, Danny continued to strengthen over unusually warm water temperatures.; Based on the formation of a 17 mile (27 km) wide eye,;; it is estimated the storm attained hurricane status late on July 18 while located 525 miles (850 km) south of St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador. Due to the storm forming at a high latitude, Danny was embedded within a higher than average surrounding pressure field, and as a result the minimum central pressure was an unusually high 1000 mbar.;

Despite moving over cooler waters and into an area of higher vertical wind shear, Danny maintained minimal hurricane status for 24 hours;; until late on July 19 when it weakened to a tropical storm. Continuing around the northern periphery of the Bermuda-Azores high, Danny turned to the east and east-southeast into an area of cooler waters, resulting in rapid weakening. The storm deteriorated into a tropical depression on July 20, and on July 21 Danny degenerated into a remnant area of low pressure. The low turned southward and southwestward into an area of warmer water temperatures, and after executing a small loop on July 24 the system developed deep convection over the center. However, large quantities of dry air prevented re-development of the storm. On July 27, the remnant low dissipated about 1240 miles (2000 km) east of Bermuda, or about 630 miles (1015 km) east of where Danny first developed.;

=Predictions=
Image:Hurricane Danny (2003).jpg|right|thumb|Hurricane Danny while located to the southeast of Newfoundland
The tropical depression that was to become Danny was not originally forecast to strengthen into a tropical storm 
;;, yet defied forecasts to become not only a tropical storm but also a hurricane. A narrow region of unusually high sea-surface temperatures (27°C - 27.5°C, 80.6°F - 81.5°F) was responsible for the intensification at a relatively high latitude.; The NHC was accurate in predicting Danny's movement clockwise around the subtropical ridge.;

Later in the forecast period as Danny was weakening, the NHC also discussed the possibility of Danny reintensifying as it moved south into a region of warmer sea-surface temperatures and less vertical wind shear. However, such a possibility was not considered likely due to the expectation that Danny would be too weak to regenerate by that point.;;

Impact and records
Hurricane Danny did not affect any land areas and there were no reports of damage or fatalities. Early in its life, Danny moved in a direction towards Bermuda, though a high pressure system forced the system to turn northward well to the east of the island. The hurricane entered the Canadian Hurricane Centre's response zone, though tropical storm winds were not reported in Canadian waters.;; The Canadian Hurricane Centre issued a gale warning for the southern half of the southeastern Grand Banks,;; though it was cancelled after gale force winds were no longer expected.;; Only one ship reported tropical storm force winds in association with Hurricane Danny; a ship on July 20 recorded a west wind of 45 mph (72 km/h) while located 105 miles (170 km) south of the center. Because Danny stayed well out to sea, no warnings or watches were issued.;

At the time of when it became a tropical storm on July 17, Danny was the third earliest for a season to produce four tropical storms, though it has since dropped to fourth. Danny became a hurricane at latitude 39.2° N, which is the furthest north a tropical cyclone has intensified into a hurricane before August.;;

See also

*List of notable Atlantic hurricanes

References


External links
* [http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/archive/2003/DANNY.shtml? NHC's archive on Hurricane Danny]
* [http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/2003danny.shtml NHC's Tropical Cyclone Report on Hurricane Danny]




Category:2003 Atlantic hurricane season
Category:Category 1 Atlantic hurricanes