
;;PlayStation; ;
|genre= Console role-playing game
|modes= Single-player
|ratings= Super Nintendo Entertainment System;ESRB: K-A (Kids to Adults);PlayStation;ESRB: T (Teen)
CERO: A (All Ages)
|platforms= Super Famicom / Super Nintendo Entertainment System ; PlayStation
|media= Super Nintendo Entertainment System;32-megabit cartridge;PlayStation;1 CD-ROM
|requirements = 
|input= Gamepad
}}
 is a console role-playing game developed and published by Square Co.|Square (now Square Enix) for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System video game console. It was first released on March 11, 1995 in Japan and on August 22, 1995 in North America. The game's story follows a group of young adventurers who are accidentally transported through time and learn that the world will be destroyed in the distant future. Vowing to prevent this disaster, they travel throughout history to discover the means to save the planet. 

''Chrono Trigger'' was developed by a group called the &quot;Dream Team&quot;;Keizo Kokubo: Well then, open the Gates to the Dream Team! ... / Developer's Ending: Cheers! You made it to one of the endings! You're now a member of the Dream Team! ; or &quot;Dream Project&quot; consisting of Hironobu Sakaguchi, Kazuhiko Aoki and composer Nobuo Uematsu, known for their works on the ''Final Fantasy'' series, and Yuuji Horii and artist Akira Toriyama, known for their works on the ''Dragon Quest'' series.

At the time of its release, certain aspects of ''Chrono Trigger'' were seen as revolutionary — including multiple endings,;Although there were some games prior to the release of Chrono Trigger that had multiple endings, the number of endings combined with the variations among these endings were notable. In addition, the ability to replay the game keeping stats from the prior game allowed the player to end the game at virtually any point in the game.; plot-related Quest (gaming)#Side-quest|sidequests focused on character development, unique battle system, and detailed graphics.;; It came in second place behind ''The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time'' on the IGN Reader's Choice 2006 list of 100 greatest video games of all time,;; and was ported by TOSE and re-released by Square Co.|Square in Japan for the Sony PlayStation during 1999. In 2004, Chrono Trigger finished runner up to Final Fantasy VII in the inaugural GameFAQs video game battle. In 2001, it was released in North America as part of ''Final Fantasy Chronicles'' for the PlayStation, which also includes ''Final Fantasy IV''. It has never been released in PAL territories.

Gameplay
''Chrono Trigger'' features standard console role-playing game|RPG gameplay, but with various innovations. As with most early RPGs, the player assumes control of the protagonist and his companions throughout the game's two-dimensional fictional world, consisting of various forests, cities, and dungeons. Navigation is conducted via an overworld map, depicting the landscape from a scaled down overhead view. Locations such as cities and forests are represented by more realistically scaled field maps, in which players can converse with locals to procure items and services, solve puzzles and challenges, or encounter enemies. However, ''Chrono Trigger'';';s gameplay deviates from traditional RPGs in that, rather than random encounters, many enemies are openly visible on field maps or lie in wait to ambush the party. Contact with enemies on a field map initiates a battle that occurs directly on the field map itself rather than on a separate battle screen.;; This concept had previously been featured in such titles as ''Secret of Mana'' and ''Final Fantasy Adventure'', but was uncommon at the time for RPGs outside the Action role-playing game|action RPG genre.

Example of a basic battle
More in line with traditional RPG elements, players and enemies may use physical or magical attacks and items to wound targets during battles. For both the playable characters and the CPU-controlled enemies, each attack reduces their number of hit points (a numerically based life bar), which can be restored through potions or spells. When a playable character loses all hit points, he or she faints; if all the player's characters fall in battle, the game ends and must be restored from a previously saved chapter—except for specific storyline-related battles that allow the player to lose. Players can equip characters with weapons, armor, helmets, and accessories that provide special effects (such as increased attack power) in battle, and use various consumable items. These items and equipment may be purchased or found on field maps, often in treasure chests. By exploring new areas and combating enemies, players progress through ''Chrono Trigger'';';s story.

''Chrono Trigger'' uses an Square Enix battle systems#Active Time Battle|Active Time Battle (ATB) system, a staple of Square's ''Final Fantasy'' game series that was designed by Hiroyuki Itō for ''Final Fantasy IV''.;; However, the variation used in ''Chrono Trigger'' is different than previous versions; the game is defined on-screen as running &quot;Active Time Battle 2.0&quot;. Each character can take action in battle once a personal timer — dependent on the character's speed Attribute (role-playing games)|statistic — counts to zero. Magic and special physical techniques &amp;mdash; such as sword abilities &amp;mdash; are handled through a system called &quot;Techs&quot;. Techs deplete a character's Magic points (a numerical meter that works like Hit Points), and often have special areas of effect; some spells damage huddled monsters, while others can harm enemies spread in a line. Enemies often change positions during battle, creating opportunities for tactical Tech use. A unique feature of ''Chrono Trigger'';';s Tech system is that numerous cooperative techniques may be used.; Each character receives eight personal Techs which can be used in conjunction with others' to create Double and Triple Techs for greater effect. For instance, Crono's sword-spinning ''Cyclone'' Tech can be combined with Lucca's ''Flame Toss'' to create ''Fire Whirl''. When characters with compatible Techs have enough Magic Points available to perform their techniques and are able to take action, the game automatically displays the combo as an option.

The time machine Epoch
''Chrono Trigger'' features other unique gameplay traits, including time travel. Players have access to seven eras of the game world's history, and actions taken in the past eras affect future events. Throughout history, players find new allies, complete peripheral quests and search for keynote villains. Time travel is accomplished via portals and pillars of light called &quot;time gates&quot;, as well as a time machine named &quot;Epoch&quot;. Additionally, ''Chrono Trigger'' took advantage of Mode 7 texture mapping, employing the technique in a racing minigame and several cut scenes. The game also supports a New Game+ option. After completing the game, players may start the game over using data from the previous session. Character levels, learned Skill (role-playing games)|techniques and equipment and items gathered copy over, while acquired money and some story-related items are discarded. Other unusual features of ''Chrono Trigger'' are that it can be completed without the protagonist in the party and that it features multiple endings.;; The player's progress prior to the final battle determines which of thirteen endings — some with slight variations determined by small choices — the player will receive.;; Moreover, some endings can only be viewed on a New Game+ session, in which the final boss can be challenged earlier than normally allowed. Square used the New Game+ concept in later titles, such as ''Vagrant Story,'' ''Chrono Cross'', ''Parasite Eve'' and ''Final Fantasy X-2''.

Plot
=Characters=

Crono, Lucca, and Frog battle Magus
''Chrono Trigger'';';s seven playable characters come from several different eras throughout the game world's history. The game begins in 1000 A.D. with Crono, Marle and Lucca. Crono is a silent protagonist, and characterized as a brave, fearless young man who is skilled in the use of the katana, while Marle is actually Princess Nadia of the Guardia kingdom, an active, spirited tomboy often at odds with her father, the king. Lucca is a mechanical genius and — more comfortable around machinery than people — has few friends other than Crono. She has a passionate interest in science, fueled by an accident that claimed her mother's legs several years earlier, and her home is now filled with laboratory equipment and machinery. From 2300 A.D., Robo is a robot with a bright and curious personality created to assist humans. A worldwide disaster in 1999 A.D. had rendered him dormant, but after he is found and repaired by Lucca, he joins the group out of gratitude.;;

At the other end of the timeline is Ayla, a prehistoric woman living in 65,000,000 B.C.Characterized as fierce, confident and unmatched in strength, Ayla is the chief of Ioka Village and has been leading her people in a war against the Reptites, evolved humanoid dinosaurs seeking dominance over the world. The last two characters to join the group come from 600 A.D. — Frog and the optional character Magus, though the latter was born in the 12000 B.C. era. Frog is a former squire originally named &quot;Glenn&quot;; his body was changed into that of an anthropomorphic frog by Magus. After Magus slew his friend, Cyrus, and transformed him into a frog, Frog dedicated his life to protecting the queen of Guardia and avenging Cyrus by killing Magus. Blaming himself for failing his friend, Frog is depicted as chivalrous but mired in regret over the past. Magus is a powerful sorcerer and the leader of the Mystics, a race of demons and intelligent animals who war with humanity in this time period. Magus was originally called &quot;Janus&quot;, and was the prince of the Zeal kingdom in 12000 B.C. However, the extraterrestrial entity known as &quot;Lavos&quot; destroyed his kingdom and sent him to the era of 600 A.D. when he was still a child. Desiring vengeance against Lavos, and concerned over the unknown fate of his sister, Schala, he is portrayed as cynical and brooding.;

=Story=
''Chrono Trigger''s story begins in 1000 A.D., during the Millennial Fair celebration in the Kingdom of Guardia. When a teleportation device constructed by Crono's inventor friend, Lucca, sends Crono's new friend Marle thruogh a rift in time, the two set out to save her.;Taban: What's going on Lucca? WHERE IS SHE? / Lucca: The way she disappeared... It couldn't have been the Telepod! The warp field seemed to be affected by her pendant... ;

Lavos
During their adventures, Crono, Marle, and Lucca travel to 2300 A.D., where they befriend the humanoid robot Robo. They also discover that the world will be devastated by a being known as Lavos in 1999 A.D.;Marle: Say, what does this button do? / Lucca: 1999 A.D.? Visual record of The Day of Lavos... / 'Marle: Wh, what...IS that? / Lucca: Lavos?... Is that what's destroying our world?! / Marle: We must truly be in the future... ; In their quest to avert this future, they track down the wizard Magus, Lavos' apparent creator from the 600 A.D.;Heckran: If only the great Magus who brought forth Lavos 400 years ago, had destroyed the human race! ; They are joined in their quest by the anthropomorphic toad Frog.

Confrontation with Magus
Upon finding and defeating Magus, the team discovers that he did not create Lavos, but instead had intended to awaken it. Their interference causes them to be thrown to 65,000,000 B.C., where the cavewoman Ayla joins the team. Here it is revealed that Lavos is an extraterrestrial life form that arrived during this era. His arrival leads the team to the Kingdom of Zeal in 12,000 B.C., which is attempting to draw power from the sleeping Lavos. Their efforts awaken Lavos, and Crono is killed in the ensuing confrontation.

The group reunited
At this point much of the game's events become optional. A quest allows Crono to be saved, but it can be skipped, and the player is given the option of either adding Magus to the team or fighting him. A wide range of side quests are also made available to better equip the player for their final confrontation with Lavos, such as empowering the ancient Sun Stone or finding the Rainbow Shell. Once the player decides to fight Lavos, they can travel to 1999 to battle him. After penetrating the creature's shell, the team discovers that Lavos has been harvesting DNA from the planet's inhabitants while absorbing the energy produced, making even stronger clones of itself to repeat the process.;Lucca: It lives on a planet for as long as possible, stealing away the most vital resources... It combined the DNA it found here with its own, and gave birth to those creatures up on Death Peak. ; Presented with the results of Lavos' machinations, they confront its true form and finally destroy the creature. 

There are many different endings depending on the player's actions, mainly based on when Lavos was defeated. Minor choices during gameplay can create variations in these endings, but none that affect the overall outcome. The first time through the game, everyone parts ways during the last night of the Millennial Fair and returns to their own eras. Crono's mom then accidentally enters the time gate at the fair before it closes, prompting Crono, Marle, and Lucca to set out in the Epoch on another adventure to find her while fireworks light up the night sky.;Mom: Look, Crono! Your cat's running away because you haven't been feeding it! Hey, come back here! / Marle: Oh, great! Crono, that Gate will never open again! / Lucca: Well it looks like we have no choice but to go after them! / Marle: Go after them?! But the Gate's... Lucca, don't turn off your brain, yet! / Lucca: I forgot! We have a Time Machine! ;

Development
''Chrono Trigger'' was produced by Kazuhiko Aoki and directed by Akihiko Matsui, Yoshinori Kitase and Takashi Tokita. The development of the game was supervised by Hironobu Sakaguchi, producer and creator of the ''Final Fantasy'' series, and Yuuji Horii, director and creator of the ''Dragon Quest'' series. Yuuji Horii worked on the general outline of the story; as a fan of time travel fictions, such as the TV series ''Time Tunnel'', he focused on a theme of time travel for ''Chrono Trigger''.;; The outline was subsequently edited and completed by Masato Kato, who notably wrote all the events of the 12,000 B.C. era of the game's world. Finally, Yoshinori Kitase and Takashi Tokita created the different sub-scenarios.;;

The characters of the game were designed by Akira Toriyama, creator of the manga ''Dragon Ball'' and also known for his works on the ''Dragon Quest'' series. Among the other designers who participated in the development were notably Tetsuya Takahashi, working as a graphic director, and Yasuyuki Honne, Tetsuya Nomura, and Yusuke Naora, working among others as field graphic designers.;; The Japanese release of the game included running counts of items in the player's status menu and special art displayed at ''Chrono Trigger'';';s primary ending.;; The North American version was created before these features were added, and contains other vestiges of the game's early development removed from the Japanese edition—such as the song ''Singing Mountain'', deleted with its eponymous prehistoric dungeon.;; Nintendo of America censored certain dialogue, including references to breastfeeding, consumption of alcohol, and religion.; Translator Ted Woolsey was given roughly thirty days to localize the game for English audiences; some of his work was cut due to space constraints.;; The game was later completely retranslated by fans, who issued a playable patch and spreadsheets contrasting each release with annotations clarifying key differences.;;; However, as the bundled documentation notes, the translation was optimized for accuracy over readability, allowing English-speaking players to know what is and isn't canon without learning Japanese, and is not intended as a replacement for Woolsey's work.

Audio

''Chrono Trigger'';';s soundtrack was scored by Yasunori Mitsuda and the ''Final Fantasy'' series' veteran composer Nobuo Uematsu. The game was the first for which Mitsuda had served as composer, but after he contracted stomach ulcers, Uematsu was brought onto the project to compose ten songs.;; At the time of the game's release, the quantity of its tracks and sound effects were unprecedented,; and the soundtrack was released as a three-disc collection. Additionally, a one-disc acid jazz arrangement called &quot;''The Brink of Time''&quot; was also released. Later, another one-disc soundtrack was produced to complement the PlayStation rerelease of the game, featuring the orchestral tracks used in cut scenes. Yasunori Mitsuda also composed four new pieces for the game's bonus features, though they were not included on the rerelease soundtrack. Recently, Yasunori Mitsuda arranged versions of music from the ''Chrono'' series for Play! A Video Game Symphony|Play! video game music concerts, presenting the main theme, &quot;Frog's Theme&quot;, and &quot;To Far Away Times&quot;.;;

The soundtrack has been heavily remixed by fans, with more than 300 tributes,;; and a handful of cover performance albums sold at retail. These include ''Time &amp; Space - A Tribute to Yasunori Mitsuda'' and ''Chrono Symphonic''. The latter was released by remix website OverClocked ReMix, and sought to provide an orchestrated score to an amateur script for a hypothetical ''Chrono Trigger'' film. Additionally, hip hop production team Compromised created a bastard pop album known as ''The Chrono Trigger Mixtape, Vol. 1'', produced by mixing the a cappella from rap songs with the instrumental remixed versions of ''Chrono Trigger'' songs.;; Japanese fans often sell their remix work in compilation albums popularly called &quot;''Dōjin''&quot; by western fans.;;

Reception and criticism
''Chrono Trigger'' has sold more than 2.36 million copies in Japan and 290,000 abroad.;; The first two million copies sold in Japan were delivered in only two months.;; The game was met with substantial success upon release in North America,;;;; and its rerelease on the PlayStation as part of the ''Final Fantasy Chronicles'' package topped the NPD TRSTS PlayStation sales charts for over six weeks.;; This version was later re-released again in 2003 as part of Sony's Greatest Hits line, and, in recent times, ''Chrono Trigger'' has placed highly on all four of multimedia website IGN's &quot;top 100 games of all time&quot; lists. On the first, in 2002, the game placed 4th, while placing 6th on the second in early 2005, 13th on the third list in late 2005, and 2nd on the list for 2006.;

''Chrono Trigger'' was not only a best-seller, but also well received critically. ''Nintendo Power'' called it Square's &quot;biggest game ever&quot;, citing improved graphics, sound, and gameplay over past RPG titles,; while ''Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine'' described it as &quot;original and extremely captivating&quot;, expressing particularly favorable responses to its graphics, sound and story.;; Additionally, IGN commented that &quot;it may be filled with every imaginable console RPG cliché, but ''Chrono Trigger'' manages to stand out among the pack&quot; with &quot;a [captivating] story that doesn't take itself too serious&quot; and &quot;one of the best videogame soundtracks ever produced&quot;.;

However, other critics, such as the staff of video game websites RPGFan and RPGamer, have questioned the game's length, as it is shorter than most RPGs, and noted that its difficulty level is low as compared to many other RPGs.;;;;; Overall, reviewers regarded ''Chrono Trigger'';';s replay value as high due to the game's multiple endings, its gameplay as simple but innovative, and its story as &quot;fantastic yet not overly complex&quot;.

Moreover, the game was included in GameSpot's &quot;The Greatest Games of All Time&quot; list released in April 2006,;; and also appeared as 28th on an &quot;All Time Top 100&quot; list in a poll conducted by Japanese magazine ''Famitsu''.;;

Different versions
{| class=&quot;infobox bordered&quot; style=&quot;width: 18em; font-size: 90%; text-align: left; float: right; margin-right: 1em;&quot; cellpadding=&quot;3&quot;
|-
! colspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;background-color: #ccccff; font-weight: bold; font-size: 110%; text-align: center;&quot; | Super Famicom release
|-
| colspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;text-align: center;&quot; |129px
|-
! colspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;background-color: #ccccff; font-weight: bold; font-size: 110%; text-align: center;&quot; | PlayStation rerelease
|-
| colspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;text-align: center;&quot; |Final Fantasy Chronicles box art
|}

A few months prior to ''Chrono Trigger'';';s market release, a Development stage#Beta|beta version was given to magazine reviewers and game stores. An unfinished build of the game, it contains numerous differences from the final version, such as unused music tracks and a location called &quot;Singing Mountain&quot;.;;;; Curious fans later explored the ROM image through various methods, discovering two unused world map character sprites and presumed additional sprites for certain non-player characters. This has led some to rumor that an eighth playable character exists or was intended for play,;; but there is no other evidence to this claim.;; The game's formal release — now commonly sold on auction sites;; — included two world maps, and Japanese buyers who preordered the game received holographic foil cards. This release used a 32-megabit cartridge with battery-backed RAM for saved games, and didn't use any special on-cartridge coprocessors. 

An example of one of the anime cut scenes in the PlayStation rerelease
An enhanced port of ''Chrono Trigger'' for the Sony PlayStation was developed by TOSE and released by Square Co.|Square in Japan in 1999. This port was later released in North America in 2001 — along with a remastered version of ''Final Fantasy IV'' — under the package title &quot;''Final Fantasy Chronicles''&quot;. This version included anime cut scenes created by original character designer Akira Toriyama's Bird Studio and animated by Toei Animation, as well as several bonus features, accessible after achieving various endings in the game. This version has received negative criticism for lengthy load times not present in the original.; The PlayStation version's color palette also suffered in the translation, and a loss of detail was noticeable from the original. Whether ''Chrono Trigger'' will appear on the Wii's Virtual Console depends on the settlement of certain copyright issues.;;

There have been two notable attempts by ''Chrono Trigger'' fans to unofficially remake parts of the game for PC with a 3D graphics engine. The most prominent projects, ''Chrono Resurrection'' (an attempt at remaking ten small interactive cutscenes of the game);; and ''Chrono Trigger Remake Project'' (an attempt at remaking the entire game),;; were forcibly terminated by Square Enix by way of a cease and desist order.;;;;;;;;

Sequels
''Chrono Trigger'' inspired a variety of sequels and spin-off titles. A 16-minute OVA entitled &quot;''Nuumamonja: Time and Space Adventures''&quot; was released in 1996. Additionally, three titles were released for the Satellaview in 1995, and a fourth in 1996. The first three were ''Chrono Trigger: Jet Bike Special'', a racing game based on a minigame from the original, ''Chrono Trigger: Character Library'', featuring profiles on characters and monsters from the game, and ''Chrono Trigger: Music Library'', a collection of music from the game's soundtrack. The contents of ''Character Library'' and ''Music Library'' were later included as extras in the PlayStation rerelease of ''Chrono Trigger''.

The fourth title, ''Radical Dreamers: Nusumenai Hōseki'', is a side story to ''Chrono Trigger'' created to resolve a loose subplot from its predecessor.;; A short, text-based game relying on minimal graphics and atmospheric music, the game never received an official release outside Japan, though it was later fan translated to English.;; Elements of its plot, including characters and setting, were later adapted to form the early sequences of a better known PlayStation sequel, ''Chrono Cross''. ''Radical Dreamers: Nusumenai Hōseki'' was consequently removed from the series' main continuity and referred to as another dimension during ''Chrono Cross''.;Kid: Radical Dreamers...!? And me name's on here, too! What the bloody hell is goin' on? ... / Kid: ......This seems to be an archive from a different time than our own. Aside from the two worlds we already know about...there may be other worlds and times which exist... ;

There are no plans for additional titles in series, despite a 2001 statement from Hironobu Sakaguchi that the development team of ''Chrono Cross'' wanted to make a new ''Chrono'' game and that script ideas were being considered.;; The same year, Square applied for a trademark for the names &quot;''Chrono Break''&quot; and &quot;''Chrono Brake''&quot; in the United States and Japan, respectively. However, the United States trademark was dropped in 2003.;; Yuji Horii expressed no interest in returning to the Chrono franchise in 2005.;; Hironobu Sakaguchi remarked in April 2007 that his creation ''Blue Dragon'' was an &quot;extension of [Chrono Trigger].&quot;;; During a Cubed³ interview on 1 February, 2007, Square Enix’s Senior Vice President Hiromichi Tanaka said that although no sequel is currently planned, some sort of sequel is still possible.;;;

References


External links

*
*[http://www.chronocompendium.com/ Chrono Compendium], a series encyclopedia
*
*
*
*
*
*
*



Category:1995 video games
Category:Chrono series
Category:PlayStation games
Category:Super NES games
Category:Video games with time travel


ca:Chrono Trigger
da:Chrono Trigger
de:Chrono Trigger
es:Chrono Trigger
fr:Chrono Trigger
id:Chrono Trigger
it:Chrono Trigger
he:כרונו טריגר
ms:Chrono Trigger
nl:Chrono Trigger
ja:クロノ・トリガー
no:Chrono Trigger
pl:Chrono Trigger
pt:Chrono Trigger
ro:Chrono Trigger
ru:Chrono Trigger
fi:Chrono Trigger
sv:Chrono Trigger
tr:Chrono Trigger
zh:时空之轮