
The Melbourne Storm is a professional rugby league football club based in the city of Melbourne, Australia. The Melbourne club is currently 100% owned and operated by News Limited.

The club was founded in 1998 as part of the newly formed National Rugby League competition. The club is the first first-grade club based in Victoria. They play their home games at Olympic Park.

History
In 1996, the Australian Rugby League (ARL) decided to establish a Melbourne based team due to the high attendances at recent State of Origin matches. But in May 1997, Super League boss John Ribot pushed for a Melbourne based club in the Super League competition, which was the rival against the ARL competition.;; Former Brisbane Broncos centre Chris Johns became the CEO of the club and Ribot stepped down from head of the Super League to set up the club. In September 1997, Melbourne announced that Chris Anderson would be their foundation coach, and then the Super League announced that their new team will be named the Melbourne Storm.;;

The Melbourne club then went forward with signing players from other clubs, including Robbie Ross, Glenn Lazarus, Brett Kimmorley and Scott Hill. With the Super League and ARL joining into one competition, the Melbourne team was now part of the National Rugby League (NRL) for the 1998 season. In their first ever game, they defeated Illawarra, with Glenn Lazarus being their inaugural captain. Melbourne, in a complete shock to the rest of the competition, won their first four games, before losing to Auckland.;; They went on to make the finals, but were defeated by eventual premiers Brisbane Broncos.;;

Storm players Ryan Hoffman and Clint Newton celebrate a win in 2007.

In 1999, Melbourne won their eight of their first eleven games, and went on to make the finals in third position on the premiership ladder. The team was beaten convincingly 34&amp;ndash;10 in the quarter final by St. George Illawarra Dragons|St. George Illawarra, but came from behind in both the semi final and preliminary final to make the grand final. Melbourne faced St. George Illawarra in the 1999 grand final, St. George Illawarra were favourites due to comfortably defeating Melbourne just three weeks earlier.; When St. George Illawarra were ahead 14&amp;ndash;0 at half time and Melbourne seemed down and out, but two tries in to Melbourne put the score line at 18&amp;ndash;14 in favour of St. George Illawarra with 15 minute remaining. With three minutes remaining Melbourne Rugby league positions#Winger|winger Craig Smith was knocked out by a high tackle which caused him to lose the ball over the try line. In a historic video refereeing decision, a penalty try was awarded and Melbourne's Matt Geyer kicked the goal that won Melbourne the 1999 Grand final.;;;

Season 2000 saw Melbourne have consistent results after losing their first four games of the season. They made the finals (finishing 6th), but were eventually knocked out by Newcastle in the quarter-finals. Between 2001 and 2002, the Melbourne club performed poorly. Cracks were starting to appear between Johns, Ribot and Anderson through out the period, and Anderson quit as coach of Melbourne mid season of 2001, and was replaced by Mark Murray. The Melbourne club failed to make the finals in 2001. Johns left the club as CEO at the end of 2002 and coach Murray was released due to Melbourne's poor form, and missing the finals for the second year in a row. Craig Bellamy was announced as the new coach of Melbourne for 2003.;;;;

Storm players celebrating their premiership win in 2007.

Between 2003 and 2005, Melbourne made the finals under coach Bellamy, but lost games in the semi finals preventing them from making the grand final. In 2006, the Melbourne team won their first minor premiership for being on top of the NRL ladder. Melbourne only lost four games in the season making them outright leaders by four wins.;; They went on to win their two finals matches and go on to the grand final.; But in the grand final, against the Brisbane Broncos, they lost 8&amp;ndash;15 to make them runners up despite being favourites for the title.;;

In 2007, they played as they did in 2006, once again finishing on top after 25 rounds.In the first week of the NRL Finals, Melbourne played Brisbane, in which Melbourne won 40-0. Securing a spot in a Preliminary Final.In the Preliminary Final Melbourne came up against Parramatta. It was tied 10-10 at half time, before a superb second half by Melbourne, finishing the game 26-10. The win was particularly satisfying for Melbourne fans, coming soon after Paramatta CEO Denis Fitzgerald saying that rugby league should not be promoted in Melbourne. Melbourne ended up drawing a larger crowd than Manly's preliminary final.

Melbourne comprehensively defeated Manly 34-8 in the 2007 NRL Grand Final. The 2007 season for the Melbourne Storm has been the most successful ever year of all time for a premiership winning side in rugby league, with the team losing only 3 games.

Emblem and colours
Originally, the club favoured the name Melbourne Mavericks with a gunslinger logo holding a fistful of aces. The club officials were all set to go with this until News Limited's Lachlan Murdoch told them to go with something else because the Mavericks sounded too American. So CEO Chris Johns and John Ribot decided to go with the themes lightning, power and storm. The club then became known as the Melbourne Storm.;


The Storm was always going to go with the colours of their state, Victoria. These were navy blue with a white 'V'. But club consultant Peter McWhirter, from JAG fashion house, suggested that they should also have purple and gold to make their merchandise more attractive. ; Gold still appears on the logo, but has now been removed from the Storm's main colours, and the colours now consist of navy blue, purple, silver and white. 


Stadium
Melbourne have played the vast majority of their home matches at the city's Olympic Park Stadium. It was here that the club played their inaugural home match in the fourth round of the 1998 season on 3 April, 1998, having come off the back of three successive away victories.; In front of what remains the club's record Olympic Park attendance of 20,522, the team recorded a 26–16 victory over the North Sydney Bears.;; The team remained at the ground until the end of the 2000 season. In the 2000 season they attracted an average home attendance of 13,756 ; still their highest season average. Following steady attendance increases over the three years, it was decided to move home games to the much larger Colonial Stadium for the following year.; However, with the team ending up missing the finals, crowd numbers declined and it was decided to move the team back to Olympic Park, where they have remained ever since.; Attendance bottomed out at an average of 8,886 in 2004, but has risen back to an average of 11,711 for the 2007 season;, culminating in a new home attendance record of 33,427 in the Preliminary Final against Parramatta, at Telstra Dome.

In 2007 the Victorian Government confirmed that it would be building a new 31,500 rectangular stadium at Olympic Park, adjacent to the club's current ground. The Government has stated that the ground will be used for rugby league, it remains to be seen whether the Melbourne Storm will go to the new ground when it is completed in 2009.;;

Statistics and records
Melbourne's highest ever point scorer is Matt Orford with 877 points. Current players Matt Geyer (616) and Cameron Smith (512) are the highest current players with the most points. Matt Geyer has the most tries in the club's history with 102 tries, followed by Marcus Bai (70) and current player Billy Slater (66).;;.
In his rookie season, current player Israel Folau broke the Storm's club record of most tries in a season by crossing over the line 21 times in 2007.

Melbourne's highest ever victory was the 64&amp;ndash;0 against Wests Tigers on July 5 2001. The most points they have ever scored is 70, when they beat St. George Illawarra Dragons 70&amp;ndash;10 on March 3 2000. However, their biggest defeat was by 46 points to both the Bulldogs (50-4 on August 10 2003) and to St. George Illawarra Dragons|St. George Illawarra (50-4 on June 4 2000).;;
=All time head to head record=
Over the 10 years that Melbourne have participated in the National Rugby League, they have the following Win-Loss record.;;

{| class=&quot;wikitable&quot;
|-
! Games !! Wins !! Drawn !! Loss !! Tries !! Goals !! F/G !! Points !! Win %
|-
| 264 || 161 || 4 || 99 || 1188 || 932 || 8 || 6624 || 61%
|-
|}

2008 Squad

The current team for the Melbourne Storm.


































Team of the decade
As part of their 10 year celebrations in 2007, Melbourne Storm released a team of the decade. The 17 man team was selected by former assistant coach Greg Brentnall, foundation CEO John Ribot, Daily Telegraph journalist Steve Mascord and board member Frank Stanton.;;





















See also
*National Rugby League
*Victorian Rugby League

References


External links


Official Sites 
*[http://www.melbournestorm.com.au/ Melbourne Official Web Page]
*[http://www.nrl.com/Clubs/Storm/tabid/88/Default.aspx NRL Official Site on Melbourne]

News Sites
*[http://www.foxsports.com.au/league/storm Storm at foxsports.com.au/league]
Statistics &amp; Information Sites 
*[http://stats.rleague.com/rl/teams/melbourne/melbourne_idx.html Melbourne Statistics Tables]
*[http://www.rl1908.com/Clubs/Melbourne-Storm.htm RL1908 Melbourne History] 






Category:National Rugby League
Category:Australian rugby league teams
Category:Sporting clubs in Melbourne
Category:Melbourne Storm

fr:Melbourne Storm