

Tropical Storm Mindy was a weak tropical storm during October of the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season. Forming from a tropical wave near the Mona Passage, Mindy encountered moderate amounts of wind shear throughout its life. The storm reached a peak intensity of 45 mph (75 km/h) as the system developed into a tropical cyclone, and steadily weakened as it moved northwestward. After passing near the Bahamas, Mindy weakened to a tropical depression, turned sharply eastward, and dissipated on October 14. The precursor tropical wave dropped moderate amounts of rainfall across Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic, causing light damage.

Storm history

A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on October 1 and moved westward.;; By October 6, the wave was located 900 miles (1450 km) east of the Lesser Antilles, and upper level wind shear were forecasted to become more favorable for gradual development.;; On October 8, convection and gusty winds began to spread across the Lesser Antilles, and the wave slowly became better organized as wind shear decreased.;; Convection became more concentrated on October 9,;; and in response to a weakness in the subtropical ridge the wave turned to the west-northwest as it continued to organize. Despite strong southwesterly wind shear, a closed surface circulation developed over eastern Hispaniola, and late on October 10 the system developed into Tropical Storm Mindy just off the northern coast of Dominican Republic. Upon forming, the storm reached its peak intensity of 45 mph (75 km/h).;

Deep convection near the poorly-defined center decayed as Mindy moved to the northwest. Initial forecasts predicted upper level winds to decrease, allowing for the storm to intensify to a prediced peak strength of 65 mph (105 km/h).;; However, the convection diminished towards the east of the storm as the center passed near the Turks and Caicos Islands on October 11. Continued vertical shear weakened Mindy to a minimal tropical storm late on the 11th, and on October 12 the system degenerated to a tropical depression as it turned to the north. An approaching short-wave trough turned Mindy sharply eastward late on the 12th. Devoid of deep convection, the circulation continued eastward until dissipating on October 14 about 445 miles (715 km) south-southwest of Bermuda.;

Preparations
The National Hurricane Center recommended interests in the Lesser Antilles and Puerto Rico to monitor the progress of the developing tropical wave.;; Coinciding with the first advisory issued on the storm, the government of the Bahamas issued a Tropical Storm Warning for the Southeastern Bahamas and Turks and Caicos Islands.; Initially, Mindy was forecasted to threat Bermuda later in its lifetime, though the threat subsided when the storm dissipated to the east of the Bahamas.;;

Impact
Rainfall totals in Puerto Rico
The precursor tropical wave produced much-needed rainfall throughout the northern Lesser Antilles,;; including 2 to 4 inches (50 to 100 mm) in Saint Lucia;; and two days nearly continuous rainfall in Antigua.;; Rough seas and heavy amounts of precipitation were reported in Saint Kitts. The rainfall in St. Kitts filled salt ponds and turned grasses green.;; The precursor tropical wave produced winnds of up to 45 mph (75 km/h) and heavy rainfall on Tortola, leaving roads emptied as drivers sought shelter.;; The wave also dropped rainfall across the U.S. Virgin Islands, including peaks of 1.35 inches (34 mm) in Charlotte Amalie on Saint Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands|Saint Thomas and 2.98 inches (75 mm) in Christiansted, U.S. Virgin Islands|Christiansted, Saint Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands|Saint Croix.;;

Rainfall before and while Mindy was a tropical storm peaked at 7.13 inches (181 mm) in Corral Viejo near Ponce, Puerto Rico.; The deluge led to flash flooding; and run-off in Culebra, where the storm produced 3.6 inches (91 mm) of rain and a peak wind gust of 43 mph (69 km/h).;; Strong winds downed power poles and lines in northeastern Puerto Rico, leaving around 29,000 people without power.;; The storm collapsed a bridge in Las Piedras and in Guayama, resulting in $35,000 in damage (2003 USD).;;;; An overflown stream in Naguabo flooded an exit of a highway,;; while flooding on Puerto Rico Highway 114 in Mayaguez swept a car away.;; The heavy rainfall also forced the closure of the airport in San Juan,; and led to a rockslide which closed a highway between San Lorenzo and Gurabo.;; In Maunabo;; and near San Juan, downed trees due rainfall blocked local roads.;; The rainfall flooded a house in Sabana Grande;;, San Juan,;; and Las Piedras,;; and several houses in Guayama, causing $11,000 in damage (2003 USD).;; Throughout Puerto Rico, the storm caused no known deaths or injuries, while damage amounted to $46,000 (2003 USD, $50,000 2006 USD).

Tropical Storm Mindy dropped moderate amounts of rainfall in the Dominican Republic, including a maximum of 2.63 inches (60 mm) in Santiago Rodríguez Province|Santiago Rodríguez. The rainfall caused flooding and overflown rivers, and damaged 320 houses in Santiago Rodríguez with two feet of mud. The worst of the storm passed to the east of the Bahamas, resulting in a 31 mph (50 km/h) wind report in Grand Turk Island.;; Mindy produced 2 to 3 foot (0.6 to 0.9 m) swells along from Florida through North Carolina, while areas further northward experienced minor waves.;;

See also

* Tropical cyclone
* List of notable Atlantic hurricanes

External links
* [http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/2003mindy.shtml Tropical Storm Mindy Tropical Cyclone Report]
* [http://www.hpc.ncep.noaa.gov/tropical/rain/mindy2003.html Hydrometeorological Prediction Center Rainfall Summary]

References





Category:2003 Atlantic hurricane season
Category:Atlantic tropical storms
Category:Hurricanes in Puerto Rico
Category:Hurricanes in the Dominican Republic
Category:Hurricanes in the Bahamas