 
;
|campaign=
|status= Currently awarded
|description=
|clasps=
|established= 20 September 1999
|first_award= 2 July 2007
|last_award= 2007
|total= 1
|posthumous=
|recipients=
|individual= 
|higher= Highest
|same= New Zealand Cross
|lower= New Zealand Gallantry Star
|image2=
|caption2=
}}
The Victoria Cross for New Zealand (VC) is a military decoration awarded for valour &quot;in the face of the enemy&quot; to members of the New Zealand Armed Forces. It may be awarded to a person of any rank in any service and civilians under military command, and is presented to the recipient by the Governor-General of New Zealand during an investiture held at Government House, Wellington. As the highest award for gallantry in New Zealand it takes precedence over other Post-nominal letters|postnominals and medals.;;

The original VC was introduced in 1856 by Queen Victoria to reward acts of valour during the Crimean War. The Victoria Cross for New Zealand was established in 1999 and, as of July 2007, has been awarded only once. The original medal had been awarded 23 times to 22 individual New Zealand military personnel; New Zealander Captain Charles Upham receiving a bar. Only 14 medals have been awarded since the end of the Second World War. The medal itself is made from the gunmetal of a weapon supposedly captured at the Siege of Sevastopol (1854-1855)|siege of Sevastopol, but several historians have since questioned the true origin of the gunmetal.; Due to its rarity, the VC is highly prized and the medal has been sold for over £200,000 at auction. Originally all Commonwealth personnel were issued with the same award, but in the last 50 years, three countries have introduced separate award systems. New Zealand created a new award system that replaced several Commonwealth Honours with separate awards.

Origin
=Victoria Cross=


The original Victoria Cross was created by Royal warrant by Queen Victoria in 1856. It was created to recognise incidents of gallantry that were unconnected with a man's lengthy or meritorious service. Queen Victoria signed a Royal Warrant on 29 January 1856 that officially recognised the VC.; VCH, Ashcroft, Introduction; The order was backdated to 1854 to recognise acts of valour during the Crimean War.;Ashcroft, Michael, p.7&amp;ndash;10; 

The Australian and New Zealand Victoria Crosses are made from the same gunmetal as the originals.; It was originally intended that the VCs would be cast from the bronze wikt:cascabel|cascabels of two cannons that were captured from the Russians at the Siege of Sevastopol (1854-1855)|siege of Sevastopol.;Beharry, p.359;;;; The historian John Glanfield has since proven through the use of X-Rays of older Victoria Crosses that the metal used for VCs is in fact from antique Chinese guns and not of Russian origin.;;;;; 

The barrels of the cannon in question are stationed outside the Officers' Mess at the Royal Artillery Barracks at Woolwich. The remaining portion of the only remaining cascabel, weighing 10&amp;nbsp;kilograms (385&amp;nbsp;oz), is stored in a vault maintained by 15 Regiment Royal Logistic Corps at Donnington, Telford. It can only be removed under armed guard. It is estimated that approximately 80 to 85 more VCs could be cast from this source. A single company of jewellers, Hancocks of London, has been responsible for the production of every VC awarded since its inception.;;

=Separate Commonwealth awards=
In the last 20 years several Commonwealth countries have introduced their own honours systems, separate from the British Honours System. Australia, Canada and New Zealand;; have each introduced their own decorations for gallantry and bravery, replacing British decorations such as the Military Cross with their own awards. Most Commonwealth countries, however, still recognise some form of the VC as their highest decoration for valour.;;

Australia was the first Commonwealth nation to create its own VC, on 15 January 1991. Although it is a separate award, its appearance is identical to its British counterpart.;; Canada followed suit when in 1993 Queen Elizabeth signed Letters Patent creating the Canadian VC, which is also similar to the British version, except that the legend has been changed from ;FOR VALOUR; to the Latin ;PRO VALORE;.;;

New Zealand was the third country to create the VC as part of its own honours system.; On 21 September 1999, it was announced by the then Prime Minister Ms Shipley that the Queen had approved the formal institution of a new range of Royal awards to recognise acts of gallantry and bravery performed by New Zealanders. The awards were designed to be the final major element in the development of a distinct New Zealand Royal honours system.

;}}

The start of the process came with proposals released in 1995 by the ''Honours Advisory Committee'' that reviewed the honours system. Until May 1996, New Zealand made recommendations for various British awards for acts of gallantry performed during military operations and acts of bravery by civilians including the Victoria Cross and George Cross. However, the British Government's review and simplification of their awards system provided an ideal opportunity for New Zealand to also develop a unique and simplified system.;

Appearance
The Victoria Cross for New Zealand is identical to the original design. The decoration is a cross pattée, 41&amp;nbsp;millimetres high, 36&amp;nbsp;millimetres wide, bearing a crown surmounted by a lion, and the inscription ;FOR VALOUR;.;Original Warrant, Clause 1: ''Firstly. It is ordained that the distinction shall be styled and designated &quot;The Victoria Cross&quot;, and shall consist of a Maltese cross of bronze, with our Royal crest in the centre, and underneath with an escroll bearing the inscription &quot;For Valour&quot;.''; This was originally to have been ;FOR BRAVERY;, until it was changed on the recommendation of Queen Victoria, who thought some might erroneously consider that only the recipients of the VC were brave in battle.;; The decoration, suspension bar and link weigh about 27&amp;nbsp;grams (0.87&amp;nbsp;troy ounces).;Ashcroft, Michael, p.16;

The cross is suspended by a ring from a seriffed &quot;V&quot; to a bar ornamented with laurel leaves, through which the ribbon passes.The reverse of the suspension bar is engraved with the recipient's name, rank, number and unit. On the reverse of the medal is a circular panel on which the date of the act for which it was awarded is engraved in the centre.;; The ribbon is crimson, 38&amp;nbsp;millimetres (1.5 inches) wide. Although the warrants state the colour as being red it is defined by most commentators as being crimson or &quot;wine-red&quot;.;;

Awarding the medal
The Victoria Cross for New Zealand is awarded for 

The power of awarding the medal officially resides with the Queen of New Zealand. The Royal Warrant states that the &quot;Awards of a New Zealand Gallantry Award and of a Bar to an Award shall be made by Us, Our Heirs and Successors, only on a recommendation by Our Prime Minister of New Zealand or a Minister of the Crown acting for Our Prime Minister.&quot;;; As with the original Victoria Cross any recommendations will pass through the military hierarchy to the Minister for Defence.;

The original Victoria Cross had been awarded to 21 New Zealanders. Eleven of these awards were for action in the First World War. As of 2 July 2007, the Victoria Cross for New Zealand has been awarded only once. It was announced ;; that Corporal Bill (Willie) Apiata of the NZ SAS was awarded the Victoria Cross for New Zealand for his actions in saving the life of a &quot;comrade under heavy fire from opposing forces&quot; during the Afghanistan conflict in 2004.;;;; Bill Apiata received his medal from Governor-General of New Zealand|Governor-General Anand Satyanand with the approval of the Queen at a ceremony held at Government House, Wellington on 26 July, 2007. ;;

Notes


References
* 
* 

Further reading
* 
* 
* 
* 





Category:Military awards and decorations of New Zealand
Category:Victoria Cross|Victoria Cross for New Zealand