;;;
| Areas=Philippines, Hainan, Vietnam, Cambodia, Thailand
| Hurricane season=2006 Pacific typhoon season
}}
Typhoon Xangsane (international designation: ''0615'', JTWC designation: ''18W'', PAGASA name Typhoon Milenyo) was a deadly typhoon that affected the Philippines, Vietnam, and Thailand during the 2006 Pacific typhoon season. It was the fifteenth tropical storm and ninth typhoon recognized by the Japan Meteorological Agency operationally during the season, although in post-operational analysis it became the tenth typhoon of the season with the addition of Typhoon Maria. According to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center, Xangsane was the sixteenth tropical storm and tenth typhoon of the season, and was a Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale|Category 4-equivalent typhoon in terms of 1-minute average wind speeds. The name Xangsane was submitted by Laos and means elephant.;;

Xangsane made landfall in the Philippines, battering the northern islands with torrential rains and strong winds, and causing widespread flooding and landslides. After passing over Manila and emerging over the South China Sea, the typhoon made a second landfall in central Vietnam, also causing flooding and landslides there and in Thailand. The storm was responsible for at least 279 deaths, mostly in the Philippines and Vietnam, and at least $747 million (2006 USD) in damage.;;;;
;;

Storm history

On September 25, the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA) named an active low pressure area within its area of responsibility Tropical Depression Milenyo. Having earlier issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) issued its first warning on Tropical Depression 18W the same day. On September 26 the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) designated the system Tropical Storm Xangsane.

Xangsane rapidly intensified and later that day, the JMA upgraded Xangsane to a severe tropical storm. Xangsane made landfall on Samar Island as a severe tropical storm, before a bout of further rapid intensification occurred. All three agencies, the JMA, JTWC and PAGASA upgraded the storm to a typhoon late on September 26 or early September 27.

Xangsane then passed through the Philippine islands, wreaking havoc and becoming the strongest typhoon to directly impact Metro Manila in eleven years.;; As it entered the South China Sea as a weak typhoon, it began to re-intensify, reaching its secondary peak strength shortly before landfall near Huế on October 1. The JTWC ceased advisories after landfall, while the JMA carried the storm inland until it was over Thailand as a tropical depression. It remained as a low pressure area over central Indochina on the JMA's weather charts for several days, while the U.S. Navy's Automated Tropical Cyclone Forecasting system carried the remnants of Xangsane into the Bay of Bengal.

Preparations
=Philippines=
Provinces of the Philippines in which public storm signals were raised for preparations against Typhoon Milenyo.
On September 27, PAGASA issued Storm Signal Number 3, a warning for winds of 100 &amp;ndash; 185 km/h (62 &amp;ndash; 115 mph), for areas of southern Luzon. Storm Signal Number 2, for winds of 60 &amp;ndash; 100 km/h (37 &amp;ndash; 62 mph), was raised for northern Samar Island and central Luzon. Storm Signal Number 1 (30 &amp;ndash; 60 km/h, 20 &amp;ndash; 37 mph) was issued for northwestern Luzon, including Metro Manila, and northern Visayas, including the rest of Samar Island. Schools in the warned area were suspended, and airports and seaports were closed. Philippine Airlines cancelled over half of its flights to and from Ninoy Aquino International Airport for September 28, and various transit services also suspended service.;; Metro Manila and the Tagalog provinces were warned of possible flooding and strong winds.;;

When it became clear that Xangsane would approach Metro Manila, PAGASA upgraded the warning for Manila and central Luzon to Storm Signal Number 3 on September 28. All the storm signals were discontinued later that day.;;

=Vietnam=
Prior to Xangsane's final landfall, the Vietnamese government set up a steering committee headed by Deputy Prime Minister Nguyen Sinh Hung to oversee evacuations and storm preparations throughout central Vietnam.;; Provincial and local authorities evacuated over 300,000 people from low-lying areas in Ha Tinh and Phu Yen, as well as hilly areas prone to landslides. The Vietnamese government also ordered about 2,400 boats, including 273 fishing boats, to return to port.;; Vietnam Airlines, the national airline, cancelled or diverted all flights on September 30 and October 1.;; These efforts were carried out in order to prevent a repeat of the damage and fatalities caused by Typhoon Chanchu earlier in the season.;;

=Thailand=
Although Xangsane had weakened considerably over land, residents of northern Thailand were advised of the threat of flooding from the remnant low of Xangsane as it approached. The Department of Disaster Prevention and Mitigation alerted its provincial offices throughout the country to be prepared for strong winds, flash flooding, and landslides. Residents in highland areas were also warned of possible mudslides, and the army was dispatched to aid in regional storm preparations.;;

Impact
TRMM image showing Xangsane's well-defined eyewall prior to its first landfall
=Philippines=
Damage was widespread in the Philippines, particularly in Metro Manila, which the typhoon passed almost directly over. Power and water was lost in several provinces, while overflowing rivers caused flooding, landslides and made roads impassable. In some parts of the country, electricity was cut of for up to six straight days.;; Many trees and billboards were toppled by Xangsane, while Luzon suffered an island-wide power outage.; Rough waters and seaport closures left at least 3,400 people and nearly 270 vehicles stranded in ports and terminals, mainly at the primary ferry crossing between Samar Island and Bicol Region.;; Local and provincial officials described Xangsane as the worst typhoon to directly impact Manila in 11 years, when 1995 Pacific typhoon season#Super Typhoon Angela (Rosing)|Typhoon Angela passed over the city.;

The Philippine government estimated that approximately 2 million people in 19 provinces were affected by Xangsane,;; which destroyed many homes and farms on its path through the islands.; The local and regional Philippine National Red Cross chapters reported major damage in at least 116 municipalities, 12 cities and a total of 1,295 barangays across the country. Torrential rains from Xangsane also caused flooding and landslides in Laguna, Cavite and Quezon.;; In all, Xangsane was responsible for 197 deaths; and 5.9 billion Philippine pesos ($118 million, 2006 USD) in damage, mostly to personal property and agriculture.;

Xangsane inland over eastern Indochina

=Vietnam=
Xangsane made its second and final landfall in central Vietnam, causing severe flooding and strong winds that caused nearly 10 trillion Vietnamese dong ($629 million, 2006 USD) in damage and killed 71 people. The worst structural damage occurred in the city of Da Nang, where 26 people were killed. The provinces of Quang Nam and Nghe An were also hard hit, with a total of 25 people killed.; The storm damaged or destroyed around 320,000 homes, downed thousands of trees and power lines, and flooded major streets.;;

Significant agricultural damage was reported, especially in the province of Quang Binh. More than 3,000 square kilometres (1,200 sq mi) of crops, mostly rice, were damaged or washed away by the floodwaters.;; There were also reports of heavy losses of poultry and livestock, and nearly 13 km² (5 sq mi) of aquaculture and 786 fishing boats were lost.;;

=Thailand=
The remnants of Xangsane moved over Thailand on October 2 and combined with monsoonal moisture over the north central part of the country, causing torrential rains and severe flooding in over 35 provinces. Floodwaters broke through levees and barriers and flooded or damaged nearly 1.3 million rai (2,100 km², 520,000 acres) of farmland and local infrastructure.;; Many municipalities reported flooding of up to three meters (10 ft),; and the municipality of Angthong reported flooding of 60 cm (2 ft). The Department of Disaster Prevention and Mitigation reported 14 deaths,;; and villages in several provinces reported significant levels of water pollution and waterborne illnesses from stagnant waters.;;

Aftermath
=Philippines=
This image shows rainfall totals for Southeast Asia for September 25-October 2, 2006 estimated in part from data collected by the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission satellite. Storm symbols mark out the path of the typhoon. Totals of over a foot are shown over Samar in the east-central Philippines (red areas). A broad area of 4- to 8-inch totals (green) stretches from the central Philippines to the coast of Vietnam.
Following the passage of Xangsane, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) issued an emergency request for 5.7 million Swiss francs ($4.6 million, 2006 USD) to aid the Philippine Red Cross in its relief effort. In addition, the movement dispatched 3,000 workers and three disaster response teams to affected areas for search and rescue missions, damage assessments, and assistance to people affected by the typhoon. The Philippine Red Cross provided canned goods, rice, clothing, and personal hygiene items to over 6,300 families, and local volunteers provided assistance to people in shelters.;; The Spanish Red Cross, present since 1998 as a backup to the Philippine Red Cross, also sent officials, logistics equipment, and water purification systems to the more heavily areas to aid in disaster relief and damage assessments.;

A passenger bus is crushed by a billboard structure along EDSA at the Magallanes interchange in Makati City.
In Manila, fallen billboards killed several people and caused traffic delays along EDSA, the main highway of the metropolis. This prompted some members of the Senate of the Philippines to push for the removal and banning of billboard advertising in the Manila area, which had been an issue for some time. Senator Miriam Defensor-Santiago wrote an appeal to President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, asking her to approve the &quot;Anti-Billboard Blight Act of 2006&quot;, which would ban billboard advertising on major thoroughfares within Metro Manila.;;

=Vietnam=
On October 3, the IFRC released 100,000 Swiss francs ($80,300, 2006 USD) from its disaster relief fund to support the Red Cross of Vietnam,; and issued an emergency appeal for 1 million Swiss francs ($810,000, 2006 USD) in aid the next day. The Vietnamese government also released 100 billion Vietnamese dong ($6.2 million, 2006 USD) and 1,500 metric tons (1,650 short tons) of rice from the national food security stock to help the recovery effort in central Vietnam. The National Fatherland Front also issued an appeal to national and international organizations for donations and aid.;

=Thailand=
The Department of Disaster Prevention and Mitigation and the Thai Red Cross Society evacuated residents from areas of central Thailand that had been affected by flooding from the remnants of Xangsane. The Red Cross also provided victims and evacuees with food and emergency kits, and several Red Cross health centers in 12 provinces issued emergency relief kits, drinking water, and medicine kits to at least 16,000 families in flood-stricken areas.;

=Retirement=
As a result of the deaths and damage caused, it was decided at the 39th annual meeting of the ESCAP/WMO Typhoon Committee in Manila in December 2006 that the name ''Xangsane'', along with four others, would be retired from the name list.;http://www.cma.gov.cn/qxxw/t20061213_171681.phtml; In December 2007, the committee selected the name ''Leepi'' to replace Xangsane on the Lists of tropical cyclone names#Western North Pacific|Western Pacific basin name lists beginning in 2008.;;

See also

* 2006 Pacific typhoon season
* Tropical cyclone
* List of notable tropical cyclones
;;

External links

* [http://agora.ex.nii.ac.jp/digital-typhoon/summary/wnp/s/200615.html.en Digital Typhoon page on Xangsane]

References


Category:Category 4 tropical cyclones|X
Category:2006 Pacific typhoon season|Xangsane
Category:2006 meteorology
Category:2006 in the Philippines|Xangsane
Category:Typhoons in the Philippines|Xangsane (2006)
Category:Typhoons in Vietnam|Xangsane (2006)
Category:Typhoons in Thailand|Xangsane (2006)
Category:Retired Pacific typhoons|Xangsane

fr:Typhon Xangsane
ja:平成18年台風第15号
sv:Tyfonen Xangsane
tl:Bagyong Milenyo
vi:Bão Xangsane (2006)
zh:颱風象神 (2006年)