

Tropical Depression Nine was a weak tropical depression that developed and dissipated in the eastern Caribbean Sea in August of 2003. It formed from a tropical wave on August 21 to the south of Puerto Rico, and was initially forecast to strengthen to tropical storm status, due to the favorable conditions for development in the area. However, wind shear developed over the system, and the depression degenerated to a tropical wave on August 22. The system produced moderate to heavy rainfall throughout its path, and damage was reported to a few houses in Martinique from severe rainfall. In Puerto Rico, the rains flooded 10&amp;nbsp;houses, while in the Dominican Republic the precipitation led to overflown rivers and two injuries.

Storm history

A strong tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 14,;; moved westward as a disorganized system, and passed through the Cape Verde islands on August 15.;; On August 17, the broad and disorganized system developed a weak area of low pressure while located 750&amp;nbsp;miles (1,200&amp;nbsp;km) west-southwest of the Cape Verde islands.;;Convection increased over the western portion of the wave axis,;; and the system began to become better organized on August 18 while located about 1,250&amp;nbsp;miles (2,000&amp;nbsp;km) east of the Lesser Antilles.;; However, convection around the system diminished on August 19,;; and later that day it began to move through the Lesser Antilles. Despite favorable upper-level winds and falling atmospheric pressures, there were initially no signs of a circulation at the surface.;; Convection again increased early on August 20;,;; and it gradually became better organized.;; Based on a ship's wind report of the system, it is estimated the wave developed into Tropical Depression Nine on August 21 while located about 260&amp;nbsp;miles (415&amp;nbsp;km) south of San Juan, Puerto Rico.;;

The depression quickly showed signs of organization with the development of banding features around its blossoming convection. Due to a favorable upper level environment, forecasters predicted the depression to intensify to a 70&amp;nbsp;mph (110&amp;nbsp;km/h) tropical storm after making landfall on Haiti and eastern Cuba.; Upper-level outflow remained well-defined, though convection waned near the center early on August 22.;; The depression appeared to continue organizing, with a well-defined cloud band to its north and east.;; However, strong southwesterly wind shear unexpectedly became established over the system, and the depression degenerated into a tropical wave late on August 22 to the south of the eastern tip of the Dominican Republic.; The system retained a well-defined cloud pattern with a vigorous mid-level circulation, and forecasters at the National Hurricane Center indicated regeneration could have occurred at any time.;; The wave axis moved over the Dominican Republic early on August 23;,;; and became disorganized over the mountainous terrain of Hispaniola.;; There existed the potential for redevelopment as it moved into a potentially more favorable area,;; though the National Hurricane Center ceased monitoring the system on August 25 when redevelopment appeared unlikely.;;

Preparations
Coinciding with the issuance of the first advisory on the tropical depression, the government of the Dominican Republic issued a tropical cyclone warnings and watches#Tropical Storm Watch|tropical storm watch from Barahona to its border with Haiti, while a tropical storm watch was issued from Haiti's border with the Dominican Republic westward to Port-au-Prince. The United States' National Hurricane Center in Miami recommended interests in eastern Cuba to monitor the progress of the storm.;; When the depression was 205&amp;nbsp;miles (330&amp;nbsp;km) south-southeast of Santo Domingo, the Dominican Republic issued a tropical cyclone warnings and watches#Tropical Storm Warning|tropical storm warning from Punta Palenque to its border with Haiti.;; While located 155&amp;nbsp;miles (250&amp;nbsp;km) from the coast of Hispaniola, the government of the Dominican Republic extended the tropical storm warning eastward to Isla Saona, while the government of Haiti upgraded its watch area to a tropical storm warning along the coast. The National Hurricane Center also recommended citizens in the Bahamas to monitor the progress of the storm.;; After the heavy rainfall began in the Dominican Republic, officials evacuated citizens of low-lying areas.;;

Impact
Image:TD 9 (2003) Remnants.JPG|right|thumb|200px|Remnants of Tropical Depression Nine spreading over the Greater Antilles
Before developing into Tropical Depression Nine, the precursor tropical wave dropped moderate to heavy rainfall across the Lesser Antilles, including 1.96&amp;nbsp;inches (50&amp;nbsp;mm) at Hewanorra International Airport in Saint Lucia. There, a peak wind gust of 33&amp;nbsp;mph (53&amp;nbsp;km/h) was reported. ;; In Barbados, the system produced a 65 mph (105 km/h) wind gust at the top of a hotel, and heavy rainfall that resulted in flooding throughout the island. Several roads were covered with floodwaters, and many people caught in the deluge pulled off the road to wait for a break in the downpour. However, the precipitation was beneficial, as it was the first rainfall after two weeks of hot and dry conditions.;; Heavy rainfall was also reported in Martinique, which resulted in flooding and mudslides. The flooding downed several trees and closed roads in isolated locations. The flooding also damaged several houses, with some people losing everything.;;

The depression caused moderate rainfall in Puerto Rico, where two to three inches (50 to 75&amp;nbsp;mm) of precipitation were recorded.;; The flooding from the rainfall entered 10&amp;nbsp;houses. The deluge flooded streets, leaving some impassable.;; A mudslide was reported in the eastern portion of the island.;; A river in northeastern Puerto Rico surpassed its banks from flooding, though within hours it returned to normal levels.;; Damage in Puerto Rico totaled to $20,000 (2003 USD, $22,000 2006 USD).;

The depression dropped over 1&amp;nbsp;inch (25&amp;nbsp;mm) of precipitation across much of the Dominican Republic; Santo Domingo reported a peak total of 3.9&amp;nbsp;in (98&amp;nbsp;mm). The rainfall led to flooding, primarily east and west of the capital city. Several roads were flooded, obstructing traffic. The flooding collapsed a sports center and a house, injuring two people inside. Further inland, 160&amp;nbsp;people had to be evacuated when more than 100&amp;nbsp;houses were flooded. Crop damage was also reported. In Pedernales, gusty winds uprooted trees, several of which fell on power lines which caused power outages in the town. Five rivers overflowed their banks, as well.;; The rainfall was welcome in the country, as conditions were dry in the preceding months.; Flooding was also reported in eastern Jamaica, though damage there, if any, is unknown.;

See also

*Tropical cyclone
*List of notable Atlantic hurricanes

External links
* [http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/archive/2003/NINE.shtml? NHC's archive on Tropical Depression Nine]
* [http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/2003nine.shtml? NHC's Tropical Cyclone Report on Tropical Depression Nine]

References




Category:Atlantic hurricanes|Tropical Depression Nine (2003)
Category:2003 Atlantic hurricane season|TD 9
Category:Tropical depressions|Nine (2003)
Category:Hurricanes in Puerto Rico|TD 9 (2003)
Category:Hurricanes in the Dominican Republic|TD 9 (2003)