


}}
The Boy Scouts of America (BSA) is the largest youth organization in the United States. It was founded in 1910 as part of the Scout Movement. It is believed that over one hundred million Americans have been members. As of December 2005 it had a registered membership of 2,938,698 youths with 1,146,130 adult leaders organized into 122,582 units.;; Individual units of the BSA rely largely on volunteers although at higher commercial levels of administration professionals are employed. The BSA is a member of the World Organization of the Scout Movement.

The BSA arose amidst concerns of the progressive movement in the United States from people who sought to promote the social welfare of young men. The BSA adheres to the Scout method to teach typical Scouting values such as self-esteem, citizenship and outdoorsmanship through a variety of activities such as camping, aquatics and hiking.;;;;

The BSA recognizes the achievements of Scouts through advancements in rank and special awards. It includes several program divisions, targeted at boys ages seven through seventeen and young men and women ages fourteen through twenty-one. The BSA operates locally, through volunteer-led units generally known as troops, packs and crews.

The BSA has been both criticized and supported for its membership policies, which prohibit participation by atheists, agnostics, and &quot;known or avowed&quot; homosexuals; and limit participation by girls.

Origins

The progressive movement in the United States was at its height during the early twentieth century. With the migration of families from rural to urban centers, there were concerns among some people that young men were no longer learning patriotism and individualism.The YMCA was an early promoter of social welfare and other reforms involving young men.Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell|Robert Baden-Powell started Scouting in 1907 in Great Britain and the movement began to grow overseas.;;

In 1909, Chicago publisher William D. Boyce|W. D. Boyce was visiting London, England where he learned of the Scouting movement.;; Soon after his return to the US, Boyce incorporated the Boy Scouts of America on February 8, 1910.;;The YMCA became interested in the nascent BSA program and provided support.The first managing secretary was John M. Alexander, succeeded by Edgar M. Robinson, both from the YMCA.James E. West (Scouting)|James E. West took over as managing secretary and later as Chief Scout Executive, beginning a long relationship with the BSA.

Ideals
BSA &quot;Strategic Plan Identity&quot; emblem
The stated objectives of the BSA are referred to as &quot;Aims of Scouting&quot;: character development, citizenship training, and personal fitness. Each of the programs of the BSA pursues these aims through methods that are designed to be appropriate for the age and maturity of the participants.;;One of these methods is the establishment of ideals.These are statements of goals against which each youth can measure and improve himself.For Boy Scouts and Varsity Scouts, these ideals are reflected in the Scout Oath, Law, Motto and Slogan.There are similar sets of ideals for Cub Scouts and Venturers.

;The Scout Motto;;
:''Be Prepared.''
;The Scout Slogan;
:''Do a Good Turn Daily.''
;The Scout Oath;
:''On my honor, I will do my best to do my duty to God and my country and to obey the Scout Law; to help other people at all times; to keep myself physically strong, mentally awake, and morally straight.''
;The Scout Law;
:''A Scout is trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, brave, clean and reverent.''
;The Outdoor Code;
:''As an American, I will do my best to be clean in my outdoor manners, be careful with fire, be considerate in the outdoors, and be conservation-minded.''
;The Scout Sign;
:The upper arm is held horizontally out to the right side, and the forearm is held vertically, making a right angle. This is to symbolize the fact that Scouts always do the right thing.The palm of the hand faces forward, with the first three fingers extended and the tips of the little finger and thumb joined. The sign is often used to quiet scouts, when attention is required by a leader.
;The Scout Salute;
:A three-finger salute (Scouts)|three-finger salute using the same configuration as the Scout Sign, with the tip of the index finger touching the forehead or hat brim.
;The Scout Handshake;
:This is the traditional handshake done with the left hand, because upon meeting the Zulu king, Dinuzulu, the king removed his shield which was worn on the left arm and extended to Lord Baden-Powell a hand shake with his left hand. The left hand shake was a Zulu sign of vulnerability and respect. In the boy scout handbook (11th edition) it includes that a boy scout handshake is done with the left hand because that is the hand that is closest to your heart.
The BSA Scout Oath and Law have remained unchanged since they were first developed in 1910.;;;

Membership divisions
In the BSA, Scouting is considered to be one program with three main membership divisions:
*Cub Scouting, the largest of the three divisions, is available to boys from first-grade through fifth-grade, (seven through ten years old) and their families. The Cub Scout program uses a fun and challenging system to pursue the aims of character development, citizenship training, and personal fitness.; The program is divided into age-based programs of Tiger Cubs, Cub Scouts, and Webelos Scouts (acronym for 'We'll be loyal Scouts').
*Boy Scouting is the flagship program of the BSA for boys ten to eighteen.The program uses a system of outdoor activities to achieve the aims of Scouting.Varsity Scouting is a modified Boy Scout program available to boys from fourteen through seventeen that adds a system of high adventure and sporting activities to appeal to the older boy, with an emphasis on team competition.The Order of the Arrow (OA) is the Boy Scout national honor society for experienced campers, based on American Indian; traditions, and dedicated to the ideal of cheerful service and brotherhood.
*Venturing is the program for young men and women ages fourteen through twenty-one.;Venturer Application 28-303K: &quot;Venturers registered in a crew or ship prior to their twenty-first birthday may continue as members after their 21st birthday until the crew or ship recharters or they reach their twenty-second birthday, whichever comes first.&quot;; Its purpose is to provide positive experiences to help youth mature and to prepare them to become responsible adults.Venturing is based on a unique and dynamic relationship between youth, adult leaders, and organizations in their communities.;;Sea Scouting is the nautical oriented part of this division.

Organization
=National Council= 
The National Council is the corporate membership of the Boy Scouts of America that is chartered by the United States Congress to operate the BSA program. The National Council members include the elected National Executive Board, the regional executive committees, the local council representatives, members at large, and honorary members.The National program is directed by the National Executive Board and administered by the Chief Scout Executive using a staff of professional Scouters.National is registered as a non-profit private corporation and is funded from private donations, membership dues, corporate sponsors, and special events.

The BSA is governed by the National Executive Board and directed by the national president, elected by representatives from the local councils.;;Board memberships include regular elected members, presidents, the Advisory Council chair and the chairman of the Board of Regents of the National Eagle Scout Association.The board may also include up to five appointed youth members.Professional Scouters of the National staff are nonvoting members.

The National Executive Board has five group standing committees: the Administration Group Committee, Program Group Committee, Human Resources Group Committee, Regional Presidents' Group Committee, and Relationships/Marketing Group Committee.Each of these committees is in turn directly responsible for a corresponding support group that provides administrative functions.Group committees may in turn be responsible for support standing committees and groups divided into divisions.

=Regions and areas=
Boy Scouts of America Regions since 1992 
For administrative purposes, the BSA is divided into four regions–Western, Central, Southern and Northeast.;Each region is subdivided into areas, about six per region.These are then divided into local councils, the BSA's main administrative level (as of 2006, a total of 308).Councils are subdivided into districts, which in turn directly interact with BSA's units.

From the early 1920s, the BSA was divided into 12 numbered regions (each designated by a Roman numeral) which consisted of territories of several states.The 12 regions followed the organization of the federal reserve system at that time.

During a major reorganization of the BSA in 1972, the 12 regions were consolidated into a new alignment of six geographic regions (Northeast, East Central, Southeast, North Central, South Central, and Western).In 1992, the six regions were reorganized again into the four regions that exist to this date.According to the BSA division of 1992;http://dmoz.org/Recreation/Scouting/Organizations/Boy_Scouts_of_America/Councils/desc.html;:

*The Central Region covers all of Iowa, Illinois, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, North Dakota, Ohio, Wisconsin, and parts of Indiana, Kentucky, Montana, Nebraska, South Dakota, Virginia and West Virginia.

*The Northeast Region;http://www.nerbsa.org; covers all of Connecticut, District of Columbia, Delaware, Massachusetts, Maine, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Puerto Rico, Transatlantic Council, and the Virgin Islands, and parts of Maryland, Virginia and West Virginia.

*The Southern Region;http://srbsa.org; covers all of Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, and Tennessee, and parts of Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Texas, Virginia and West Virginia.

*The Western Region;http://www.wrbsa.org; covers all of Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, New Mexico, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, Washington, Wyoming, Far East Council and the Pacific Basin, and parts of Montana, Nebraska, South Dakota and Texas.

Note, some states on the borders are split between two regions. 

Each region has a volunteer president, assisted by volunteer officers and board members, and the day-to-day work of Scouting is managed by the regional director, assistant and associate regional directors, and area directors.All regions and areas are subdivisions of the National Council and do not have a corporate status separate from the BSA.

=Local councils=
:''Main category: :Category:Local councils of the Boy Scouts of America|Local councils of the Boy Scouts of America''

The BSA currently has 308 local councils, which are incorporated organizations that administer BSA programs in defined geographical areas (ranging anywhere from a single city to a wide-ranging area consisting of a whole state or more).Each council is chartered annually by the National Council.;The vast bulk of councils of the Boy Scouts of America have gone through thousands of name changes, merges, splits and re-creations since the concept was introduced in the 1910s. 

The actual voting members of each council consist of volunteer representatives from each organization (chartered organization) currently having at least one BSA unit, plus annually elected members-at-large.The monthly operations of each council are managed through its volunteer executive board, led by its council president (chairman of the board).Certain other volunteers known as commissioners are appointed by the council to work directly with units, ensure standards are met, and are under the supervision of the council commissioner, also a volunteer.

Day-to-day council operations and directed by its chief executive officer called the Scout executive (sometimes called the council executive), an employed professional Scouter commissioned by the BSA, who hires and supervises other commissioned professionals and other support staff.

Bruce S. Marks Scout Resource Center

The BSA also charters two councils for Scouts who live overseas, largely on military bases in Europe and Asia.The American Scouting overseas#Transatlantic Council|Transatlantic Council, headquartered in Germany, serves US Scouts in much of Europe, and the American Scouting overseas#Far East Council|Far East Council, headquartered in Japan, serves several nations in the western Pacific.The American Scouting overseas#Direct Service|Direct Service branch makes the Scouting program available to US citizens and their dependents living in countries outside these jurisdictions or in isolated areas.The Scouting in Hawaii#Aloha Council|Aloha Council in Hawaii also serves BSA units in the American territories of American Samoa, Guam, the Northern Marianas Islands and in the sovereign countries of the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands and Palau.

=Boroughs=
Because of the high density of units, the Greater New York Councils; is divided into five boroughs with each led by a borough Scout executive.;;Each boroughis then divided into districts.

=Districts=
Commissioner
Councils are divided into districts with leadership provided by the district executive, district chairman, and the district commissioner.;Districts are directly responsible for the operation of Scouting units and, except for the district executive, are mostly staffed with volunteers. The actual voting members of each district consist of volunteer representatives from each organization (chartered organization) currently having at least one BSA unit, plus annually elected members-at-large who elect the district chairman.

=Units and chartered organizations=
The unit is the main program group of the BSA.; A unit conducts Scouting for a chartered organization; it consists of registered youth members and registered adult volunteer members. Cub Scouts are organized as packs, Boy Scouts as troops, Varsity Scouts as teams, Venturers as crews, and Sea Scouts as ships.

Each unit is operated by a community-based organization such as a business, service organization, school, labor group, or religious institution that has applied for and received a charter from the BSA. The chartered organization is responsible for selecting leadership, providing a meeting place, and promoting a good program. The chartered organization representative is the manager of Scouting in a chartered organization who serves as a liaison between the unit, the chartered organization, and the BSA.

Each unit is intended to be youth led.Boy Scout meetings are run by a Boy Scout chosen by the troop, called the Senior Patrol Leader.Venturing meetings are run by a Venturer chosen from the Crew, called the President.Varsity Scout meetings are run by a Varsity Scout chosen from the Team, called the Captain, etc.Each unit also has leaders chosen by the youths in the unit to lead activities such as campouts, service projects, etc.

The unit is led by a registered and trained leader– a Cubmaster, Scoutmaster, Coach, Advisor, or Skipper.These leaders, with one or more assistants, are appointed by a unit committee and must be approved by both the chartered organization and the local council.

A unit's affairs is administered by a unit committee, which is appointed by the chartered organization. The unit committee is a group of adults, led by the committee chairman, who oversee the unit program and activities, and manage record keeping, finance, leadership recruitment, and registration.

Federal charter
The BSA was originally incorporated in Washington, D.C. in 1910. The BSA later lobbied the U.S. Congress for a charter.;; The Boy Scouts of America was granted a federal charter in 1916, now codified as 36 U.S.C. Chapter 309; Federal charter, Boy Scouts of America;, stating that their purpose is to, ;&quot;promote, through organization, and cooperation with other agencies, the ability of boys to do things for themselves and others, to train them in scoutcraft, and to teach them patriotism, courage, self-reliance, and kindred virtues, using the methods that were in common use by boy scouts on June 15, 1916.&quot;; 

The charter authorized and set standards for the incorporation of the Boy Scouts of America. A provision in the federal charter gives the BSA the &quot;exclusive right to use emblems, badges, descriptive or designating marks, and words or phrases&quot; that they adopt. A federal charter is considered to be a prestigious national recognition of an organization.;;

Activities
The National Council is divided into several administrative branches, called &quot;groups.&quot; Each group is comprised of divisions that support the Scouting program in various ways.
=Publications=
The National Council Relationships/Publications Group publishes two magazines through the Marketing and Communications Division: ''Scouting'' is targeted towards adult leaders while ''Boys' Life'' is for the youth. ''Boys' Life'' is published in three editions.The low edition is for Tiger Cubs and Cub Scouts through age eight; the middle edition is for Cub Scouts and Webelos Scouts above age nine; the high edition is for Boy Scouts and all other subscribers.;;If the subscription is obtained through registration in the BSA program, the publisher will select the appropriate edition based on the boy's age.

=Scoutreach=
The Scoutreach Division emphasizes service to rural and urban areas and to minority populations; the name is a portmanteau combining ''Scout'' and ''outreach''.The African American Focus works with African American populations in partnerships with the African Methodist Episcopal Church, Alpha Phi Alpha, Kappa Alpha Psi, the NAACP, African American Baptist churches and other groups.The Hispanic/Latino Focus includes the ¡Scouting – Vale La Pena! program for Hispanic youth.;;;;This includes Spanish language resources such as handbooks, training material and videos.The Soccer and Scouting program is a partnership with the NSCAA to provide an alternative program for Cub Scout age Hispanic youth.;;The Asian American Focus reaches out to Indo-Chinese American, Vietnamese American, Chinese American and Korean American communities.The Rural Scouting focus targets small communities and includes the American Indian Scouting Association, a partnership with the Girl Scouts of the USA.

=Other divisions=
Tooth of Time
The High Adventure Division administers Philmont Scout Ranch, Northern Tier National High Adventure Bases and Florida National High Adventure Sea Base.
The Jamboree Division provides support for the world and national jamborees. The International Division is responsible for relations with other Scout and Guide organizations; it includes the Interamerican Scout Foundation and Direct Service.;; The Relationships Division is responsible for relations with supporting organizations outside the BSA, including the AFL-CIO, Elks, VFW and all religious associations and awards.;; Supply Division is responsible for uniforms and apparel, insignia, literature and equipment. It includes theNational Supply Group that sells equipment through Scout Shops, authorized resellers and the online ScoutStuff.org.;; The Administrative Group comprises several divisions, such as the Finance Support Division, Human Resources Administration Division, Professional Development Division, Compensation and Benefits Division and Information Services Division that provide internal administrative service and support.

=Learning for Life=
Learning for Life
Learning for Life (LFL) is an United States school and work-site based program that is a subsidiary of the BSA.It utilizes programs designed for schools and community-based organizations that are designed to prepare youth for the complexities of contemporary society and to enhance their self-confidence, motivation, and self-esteem.;;

Finance
In 2005, the BSA ranked as the twelfth-largest non-profit organization in the US, with total revenues of $665.9 million.As of January 2007, the American Institute of Philanthropy lists the Chief Scout Executive as having the fifth-highest compensation of any nonprofit chief in the United States, at $916,028.;; In 2005, the Chief Scout Executive's pay was 0.26% of total expenses, whereas the national average among charities stands at a higher 0.34%.;;The Chief Scout Executive was honored in August 2005 as one of the top fifty most effective non-profit leaders by the ''Non-Profit Times''.By comparison, the Chief Executive Officer of the similar Girl Scouts of the USA earns 0.39% of total expenses.

National Scouting Museum
The National Scouting Museum was founded in 1959 in New Brunswick, New Jersey. In 1986, it was moved to Murray State University in Murray, Kentuckyand moved to its present location in Irving, Texas in 2002.;;The museum floor is 53,000&amp;nbsp;ft² (5000&amp;nbsp;m²) and is a modern facility, featuring several Norman Rockwell paintings, high adventure sections, hands-on learning experiences, interactive exhibits, and a historical collection tracing uniforms, themes, and documents from the beginning of the American Scouting movement.;; Among the museum's artifacts are the Eagle Scoutmedal of Arthur Rose Eldred, the first Eagle Scout.;;

Good Turns
Smokey Bear with members of the Boy Scouts of America and the Camp Fire Girls celebrating the 50th anniversary of their founding in 1910.
In 1913, Scouts began the first of a series of Good Turns that included the promotion of a safe and sane Fourth of July.During the 50th anniversary of the Battle of Gettysburg, Scouts provided service to the veterans.Scouts rendered aid during the 1921 floods in Pueblo, Colorado and San Antonio, Texas.President Roosevelt delivered a radio address in 1934 appealing for assistance for the distressed and needy: Scouts responded by collecting almost two million items of clothing, household furnishings, foodstuffs, and supplies.

The National Conservation Good Turn in 1954 saw Scouts distribute 3.6 million conservation posters, 6.2 million trees, build and place 55,000 bird-nesting boxes, and arrange 41,000 conservation displays.During the height of the Cold War in 1958, the BSA delivered 40 million Civil Defense emergency handbooks and distributed 50,000 posters.

1986 saw the Donor Awareness Good Turn: 600,000 youth members distributed 14 million brochures to families, informing them of the needs for organ donations.In 1997, the President of the United States called for an increase in volunteer service in the U.S.The BSA developed the Service to America program with a commitment to provide 200 million hours of service by youth members by the end of the year 2000.As part of Service to America, the BSA provided service projects in conjunction with the National Park Service (NPS).In October 2003, the Department of the Interior expanded the program with the creation of the Take Pride in America program, opening service to all Americans.;;

The BSA developed Good Turn for America in 2004 as a program to address the problems of hunger, homelessness and inadequate housing and poor health in conjunction with the Salvation Army, the American Red Cross, and Habitat for Humanity.;;

Advancement and recognition

Merit badge sash|thumb|100px
Advancement is one of the methods used to achieve the aims of character development, citizenship training, and personal fitness.

Cub Scouts advance through various ranks beginning with the Bobcat Award.The Tiger Cub, Wolf, Bear, and Webelos Ranks are related to the four handbooks for each program level.The Arrow of Light award is the highest rank award available to Cub Scouts and prepares Webelos Scouts for the transition to Boy Scouting.

There are optional recognition programs also available in Cub Scouting.The Cub Scouts Academics and Sports Program is designed toward the third aim of Scouting:;; the development of physical, mental and emotional fitness.

The advancement program for Boy Scouts has two phases.The first phase of new Scout to First Class is designed to teach the boy Scoutcraft skills, how to participate in a group and to learn self-reliance.Scout is the joining badge, and is awarded when the Scout demonstrates a rudimentary knowledge of the Scouting ideals.;;Tenderfoot,;; Second Class,;; and First Class;; have progressively harder requirements in the areas of Scoutcraft, physical fitness, citizenship, personal growth and Scout Spirit. The second half of the advancement program for Star, Life and Eagle Scoutare based on career and avocation exploration through Merit Badges, leadership responsibility in the troop, and performing service projects for the public good. After becoming an Eagle Scout, a Scout can be awarded Eagle Palms (first Bronze, then Gold, then Silver). A palm is earned by completing an additional five merit badges and demonstrating that he has upheld the ideals of Eagle Scout.

Although Eagle Scout is the highest rank and one all Scouts should strive for, the number of Scouts achieving First Class within one year of joining is still one of the key measures of unit effectiveness.;;;;Studies have shown that if a Scout achieves First Class within a year of joining, he typically stays in the Scout program for at least three years. Scouts who do so are more likely to retain Scout values as an adult and achieve the BSA primary mission of &quot;producing useful citizens&quot;.

Varsity Scouts can earn any award or recognition that is available to Boy Scouts, including merit badges, rank advancements, and other awards.;; The Varsity Letter may be earned by participating in or accomplishing at least one high adventure or sports program, according to guidelines determined by the Varsity Coach, meeting attendance requirements and showing Scout Spirit.The Denali Award is the highest award in Varsity Scouting.

Venturers may earn a Bronze Award from a category of arts and hobbies, outdoor, religious life, Sea Scouting, or sports.;; After earning at least one Bronze Award and meeting tenure, leadership, personal growth and other requirements the Venturer may earn the Gold Award. To earn the Silver Award the Venturer must earn the Gold Award, earn first aid and CPR certifications, show leadership and participate in ethics training.;;;; Venturers may also earn expert awards that build on some areas of the Bronze Awards. These include the Venturing Ranger Award (outdoors),;; the TRUST Award (religious life) and the Quest Award (sports). 

There are also a number of optional recognitions available to Venturers, including the Venturing World Conservation Award, the Venturing Leadership Award, and the Venturing Shooting Sports Outstanding Achievement Award.

Sea Scouting has a rank progression of Apprentice, Ordinary, Able, and Quartermaster.;;Sea Scouts may also earn any Venturing award.Advanced certifications include Qualified Seaman, Small Boat Handler, the Long Cruise Badge and Sea Scout Advanced Leader (SEAL).
Wood Badge regalis
Adult leaders who complete training, tenure, and performance requirements are recognized by a system of awards.;;;The Cub Scouter Award is available to any Cub Scout leader, while the Tiger Cub Den Leader Award, Cub Scout Den Leader Award, Webelos Den Leader Award and the Cubmaster Award are available to those who have held the respective positions.The Scouters Training Award is available to any Boy Scout leader, while the Scouter's Key and Scoutmaster Award of Merit are only available to the Scoutmaster.Varsity leaders may earn the Varsity Letter and activity pins as well as any Boy Scout leader awards.The Venturing Leader's Training Award and the Venturing Leadership Award are available to any Venturing leader, while the Venturing Advisor's Key and Venturing Advisor Award of Merit are only available to the Advisor.The highest recognition for Scout leader training is Wood Badge for all Scouters and Sea Badge for Sea Scouters.

A wide variety of religious emblems programs are administered by various religious institutions for their members.These awards are recognized, but not sponsored, by the BSA.

Uniform and insignia
Scouts in uniform

The Uniform and insignia of the Boy Scouts of America give a Scout visibility and creates a level of identity within both the unit and the community.The uniform is used to promote equality while showing individual achievement.While all uniforms are similar in basic design, they do vary in color and detail to identify the different divisions of Cub Scouts, Boy Scouts, Varsity Scouts, Venturers and Sea Scouts.

Scouts and adult leaders wear the Uniform and insignia of the Boy Scouts of America#Boy Scout field uniform|Boy Scout field uniform.;;It generally consists of a khaki button-up shirt, olive green pants or shorts, belt, and neckerchief.
The Uniform and insignia of the Boy Scouts of America#Scouter dress uniform|Scouter dress uniform is appropriate for professional Scouters and all Scouting leaders on formal occasions.;;

Impact on American life
Pinewood Derby Car
Scouting and Boy Scouts are well known throughout American culture.Eleven of the twelve men to walk on the Moon were Scouts, with two of them being Eagle Scouts, Neil Armstrong and Charlie Duke.;; The &quot;Pinewood Derby,&quot; for half a century &quot;a celebrated rite of spring,&quot; has been named part of &quot;America's 100 Best&quot; by ''Reader's Digest'' magazine.;; President Gerald Ford said, &quot;I can say without hesitation, because of Scouting principles, I know I was a better athlete, I was a better naval officer, I was a better Congressman, and I was a better prepared President.&quot;;;For a more exhaustive list, see the List of notable Scouts and the List of notable Eagle Scouts.

=Scouting predominance=

The Boy Scouts of America is by far the largest source of Scouting to boys in the United States of America. The BSA is the only Scouting association available for boys to join throughout most of the country. The situation is different in some countries where there are a number of Scouting associations. 

After the founding of the Boy Scouts of America in 1910 and having received the endorsement of Baden-Powell, the BSA began an active campaign to absorb all other Scout-type youth organizations in the United States.;; As a result, almost all competitors had ceased to exist within a few years.

The BSA has litigated to protect what it sees as its right to Scouting in the United States. After receiving a federal charter in 1916, the BSA sued an early competitor, the United States Boy Scouts (USBS), in 1917 and were subsequently granted an injunction that barred the USBS from using the terms &quot;Boy Scout&quot;, &quot;Scout&quot;, &quot;Scouting&quot;, or any variation thereof.;;

By 1930, the BSA claimed to have stopped 435 groups from unauthorized use of &quot;Scouting&quot; or similar words as part of an organizational name or for commercial products.;; Currently, the BSA actively protects its registered trademarks of words like &quot;Scouting&quot; and its claimed right to the word &quot;Scout&quot; (by association) through legal means.;{{cite web | author =| year = 2007 | url = http://ttabvue.uspto.gov/ttabvue/v?pnam=Boy%20Scouts%20of%20America%20%20} | title = Trademark Trial and Appeal Board Inquiry System | format = |work =| publisher = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office | accessdate = 2007-03-06}};

=Membership controversies=

The BSA has been both criticized and supported for its membership policies, which prohibit participation by atheists, agnostics, and &quot;known or avowed&quot; homosexuals; and limit participation by girls.;;;;;;;;

See also
Varsity Scouts preparing to go backpacking
* Boy Scout Handbook
* Distinguished Eagle Scout Award
* Powder horn training course
* Ranger Award
* Scouting for All
* Scouting in the United States
* Scouting sex abuse cases

Religious oriented
* Religion in Scouting
* Religious emblems programs (Boy Scouts of America)
* Scout Sunday or Scout Sabbath
* Scout vespers

References
; 


External links
*[http://www.scouting.org National BSA home page] 
** [http://www.scouting.org/factsheets/02-507.html List of chartered organizations]
* [http://www.boyscouttrail.com Boy Scout Trail] extensive collection of Scouting awards, activities, games, skits, songs, and information.
* [http://www.meritbadge.com Merit Badge.com] A volunteer run site listing up to date information on all the current merit badges.
* [http://www.usscouts.org/ U. S. Scouting Service Project, Inc.] large collection of Scouting resource materials available online and assembled by volunteer Scouters without pay.
* [http://www.scoutingthenet.com/ Scouting The Net] contains links to thousands of Scouting related sites.
* [http://www.bsamuseum.org/ National Scouting Museum official web site]
* [http://www.SCOUTER.com/net_roster/ Searchengine for councils and districts]






Category:Boy Scouts of America
Category:Camping
Category:Canoeing
Category:Hiking organizations
Category:Lists of organizations
Category:WOSM member organizations
Category:Organizations established in 1910

de:Boy Scouts of America
fr:Boy Scouts of America
hu:Amerikai Cserkészszövetség
sv:Boy Scouts of America
vi:Hội Nam Hướng đạo Mỹ
zh:美國童軍