; (2005-06)
|blank_title_2 = Governing body 
|blank_value_2 = Government of India, Government of Assam
|inset_map_marker= yes
|website= http://www.kaziranga100.com/
}}
Kaziranga National Park (, IAST: kājirangā rāstriya uddyāna, help:IPA|pronounced ) is a national park in the Golaghat and Nagaon districts of Assam, India. It is a World Heritage Site, and two-thirds of the world's Great One-horned Rhinoceroses live in the park.;; Kaziranga has the highest density of tigers among protected areas in the world and was declared a Tiger Reserve in 2006. The park has large breeding populations of elephants, water buffalo and swamp deer. Kaziranga is recognised as an Important Bird Area by Birdlife International for conservation of avifaunal species. The park has achieved notable success in wildlife conservation compared to other protected areas in India. Located on the edge of the Eastern Himalaya biodiversity hotspot, the park combines high-species diversity and visibility.

Kaziranga is a vast expanse of tall elephant grass, marshland and dense tropical moist broadleaf forests crisscrossed by four major rivers, including the Brahmaputra, and has numerous small bodies of water. Kaziranga has been the theme of several books, documentaries and songs. The park celebrated its centenary in 2005 after its establishment in 1905 as a reserve forest.

Etymology
Though the etymology of the name Kaziranga is not certain, there exist a number of possible explanations.According to one legend, a girl named Ranga, from a nearby village, and a youth named Kazi, from Karbi Anglong, fell in love.This match was not acceptable to their families, and the couple disappeared into the forest, never to be seen again.The forest was then named after them.;;According to another legend, Srimanta Sankardeva, the 16th century Vaisnava saint-scholar, once blessed a childless couple, Kazi and Rangai, and asked them to dig a big pond in the region so that their name would live on.Testimony to the history of the name can be found in some records, which state that once, while the Ahom king Pratap Singha (17th century) was passing by the region, he was particularly impressed by the taste of fish and on inquiry, he was told it came from Kaziranga.;;

However, some historians believe that the name Kaziranga was derived from the Karbi Word ''Kajir-a-rang'', which means &quot;the village of Kajir (kajiror gaon)&quot;. Among the Karbis, Kajir is a common name for a girl child,;;and it was believed that a woman named Kajir once ruled over the area.Fragments of monoliths associated with Karbi rule found scattered in the area seem to bear testimony to this assertion. Kaziranga could also mean the &quot;Land of red goats (Deer)&quot;, as the word ''Kazi'' in the Karbi language means &quot;Goat&quot;, and ''Rangai'' means &quot;Red&quot;.;

History


Mary Victoria Leiter, the wife of the Governor-General of India|Viceroy of India, Lord Curzon, is credited with starting the movement for conservation of rhinoceroses.
The history of Kaziranga as a protected area can be traced back to 1904, when Mary Victoria Leiter, the wife of the Governor-General of India|Viceroy of India, Lord Curzon, visited the area.;; After failing to spot a rhinoceros, for which the area was renowned, she persuaded her husband to take urgent measures to protect the dwindling species.;; On June 1, 1905, the Kaziranga Proposed Reserve Forest was created with an area of .;;Over the next three years, the park area was extended by , to the banks of the Brahmaputra River.;; In 1908, Kaziranga was designated a Reserve forest. In 1916, it was converted to a game sanctuary—The Kaziranga Game Sanctuary—and remained so till 1938, when hunting was prohibited and visitors were permitted to enter the park.;

The Kaziranga Game Sanctuary was renamed the Kaziranga Wildlife Sanctuary in 1950 by P.D. Stracey, the forest conservationist, in order to rid the name of hunting connotations.; In 1954, the government of Assam passed the Assam (Rhinoceros) Bill, which imposed heavy penalties for rhinoceros poaching.; 14 years later, in 1968, the state government passed 'The Assam National Park Act of 1968', declaring Kaziranga a designated national park.; The 430 km² (166 mi²) park was given official status by the central government on February 11, 1974. In 1985, Kaziranga was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO for its unique natural environment.; ; 

Kaziranga has witnessed several natural and man-made calamities in recent decades. Floods caused by overflowing of river Brahmaputra have led to significant losses in animal life.; [http://www.unep-wcmc.org/sites/wh/kazirang.html Kaziranga Factsheet (Revised)], UNESCO, Retrieved on 2007-02-27 ; Encroachment by humans along the periphery has also led to a diminished forest cover and a loss of habitat.;;An ongoing separatist movement in Assam by the United Liberation Front of Asom (ULFA) has crippled the economy of the region,;; but Kaziranga has remained unaffected by the movement; in fact, instances of rebels from the United Liberation Front of Assam protecting the animals, and in extreme cases killing the poachers, have been reported since the 1980s.; 

The park celebrated its centenary with much fanfare in 2005, inviting descendants of Lord Curzon for the celebrations.; In early 2007, two rhinoceros and elephants were relocated to Manas National Park, the first instance of relocation of elephants between national parks in India.;;

Geography


Map of the Kaziranga National Park
Kaziranga is located between latitudes 26°30' N and 26°45' N, and longitudes 93°08' E to 93°36' E within two districts in the Indian state of Assam—the Kaliabor subdivision of Nagaon district and the Bokakhat subdivision of Golaghat district.;

It is approximatelyin length from east to west, andin breadth from north to south.;; Kaziranga covers an area of , with approximatelylost to erosion in recent years.; A total addition ofalong the present boundary of the park has been made and notified with separate national park status to provide extended habitat for increasing population of wildlife or as a corridor for safe movement of animals to Karbi Anglong Hills.;Elevation ranges fromto .; The park area is circumscribed by the Brahmaputra River, which forms the northern and eastern boundaries, and the Mora Diphlu, which forms the southern boundary. Other notable rivers within the park are the Diphlu and Mora Dhansiri.; 

Kaziranga has flat expanses of fertile, alluvial soil formed by erosion and silt deposition by the Brahmaputra.; The landscape consists of exposed sandbars, riverine flood-formed lakes known as ''beels'' (which make up 5% of the surface area),; and elevated regions known as ''chapories'' which provide shelter for animals during floods. Many artificial ''chapories'' have been built with the help of the Indian Army for the animals' safety.;[http://web.archive.org/web/20060501222012/http://www.wildphototoursindia.com/kaziranga_national_park.htm Kaziranga National Park]. WildPhotoToursIndia(Through Archive.org). Retrieved on 2007-02-27;; ; Kaziranga is one of the largest tracts of protected land in the sub-Himalayan belt, and due to the presence of highly diverse and visible species, has been described as a &quot;biodiversity hotspot&quot;.;; The park is located in the Indomalaya ecozone, and the dominant biomes of the region are Brahmaputra Valley semi-evergreen forests of the tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests biome and a frequently flooded variant of the Terai-Duar savanna and grasslands of the tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands biome.

Climate


The park experiences three seasons: summer, monsoon, and winter. The winter season, between November and February, is mild and dry, with a mean high ofand low of .; During this season, ''beels'' and ''nallahs'' (water channels) dry up.; The summer season between March and May is hot, with temperatures reaching a high of .; During this season, animals are usually found near water bodies.; The rainy monsoon season lasts from June to September, and is responsible for most of Kaziranga's annual rainfall of .; During the peak months of July and August, three-fourths of the western region of the park is submerged due to the rising water level of the Brahmaputra. The flooding causes most animals to migrate to elevated and forested regions outside the southern border of the park, such as the Mikir hills.; However, occasional dry spells create problems as well, such as food shortages for the wildlife in the park.;;

Fauna


Great Indian One-Horned Rhinoceros. 

Wild Asiatic Water Buffalo - Female with calf at Kaziranga National Park

Kaziranga contains significant breeding populations of 35 mammalian species,;; of which 15 are threatened as per the IUCN Red List.; The park has the distinction of being home to the world's largest population of the Great Indian One-Horned Rhinoceros (1,855),; ;; Wild Asiatic Water Buffalo (1,666);'Wild buffalo census in Kaziranga', The Rhino Foundation for Nature in NE India, Newsletter No. 3, June 2001; and Eastern Swamp Deer (468).;; Significant populations of large herbivores include elephants (1,940),; ; gaur (30) and sambar (58). Small herbivores include the Indian Muntjac, wild boar and hog deer.;;;

Kaziranga is one of the few wild breeding areas outside Africa for multiple species of large cats such asIndian Tigers and Leopards.;Kaziranga was declared a Tiger Reserve in 2006 and has the highest density of tigers in the world (one per five km²), with a population of 86, as per the 2000 census.;Other felids include the Jungle Cat, Fishing Cat and Leopard Cats.; Small mammals include the rare Hispid Hare, Indian Gray Mongoose, Small Indian Mongooses, Large Indian Civet, Small Indian Civets, Bengal Fox, Golden Jackal, Sloth Bear, Chinese Pangolin, Indian Pangolins, Hog Badger, Chinese Ferret Badgers and Particolored flying squirrels.;;;[http://www.kolkatabirds.com/kaziranga.htm Kaziranga], Kolkata Birds, Retrieved on 2007-04-08.; Nine of the 14 primate species found in India occur in the park.; Prominent among them are the Assamese Macaque, Capped, Golden Langur, as well as the only ape found in India, the Hoolock Gibbon.;;; Kaziranga's rivers are also home to the endangered Ganges Dolphin.;

An IndianRoller at Kaziranga
Kaziranga has been identified by Birdlife International as an Important Bird Area.;; It is home to a variety of migratory birds, water birds, predators, scavengers and game birds. Birds such as the Lesser White-fronted Goose, Ferruginous Duck, Baer's Pochard duck and Lesser Adjutant, Greater Adjutant, Black-necked Stork and Asian Openbill stork migrate from Central Asia to the park during winter.;; Riverine birds include the Blyth's Kingfisher, White-bellied Heron, Dalmatian Pelican, Spot-billed Pelican, Spotted Greenshank and Black-bellied Tern.; Birds of prey include the rare Eastern Imperial, Greater Spotted, White-tailed Eagle|White-tailed, Pallas's Fish Eagle, Grey-headed Fish Eagle, and the Lesser Kestrel.; 

Kaziranga was once home to seven species of vultures, but the vulture population reached a near extinction by supposedly feeding on animal carcasses containing the drug Diclofenac.; Only the Indian Vulture, Slender-billed Vulture, and Indian White-rumped Vulture have survived.;R Cuthbert, RE Green, S Ranade, S Saravanan, DJ Pain, V Prakash, AA Cunningham (2006) &quot;''Rapid population declines of Egyptian vulture (Neophron percnopterus) and red-headed vulture (Sarcogyps calvus) in India''&quot;,Animal Conservation 9 (3), 349–354. doi:10.1111/j.1469-1795.2006.00041.x [http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1469-1795.2006.00041.x?journalCode=acv] Retrieved on 2007-03-09; Game birds include the Swamp Francolin, Bengal Florican and Pale-capped Pigeon.;

Other families of birds inhabiting Kaziranga include the Great Indian Hornbill and Wreathed Hornbill, Old World babblers such as Jerdon’s and Marsh Babblers, weaver birds such as the common Baya Weaver, threatened Finn's Weavers, thrushes such as Hodgson's Bushchat and Old World warblers like the Bristled Grassbird. Other threatened species include Black-breasted Parrotbill and the Rufous-vented Prinia.;

Two of the largest snakes in the world, the Reticulated Python and Rock Python, as well as the longest venomous snake in the world, the King Cobra, inhabit the park. Other snakes found here include the Indian Cobra, Monocled Cobra, Russell's Viper and the Common Krait.;; 
Monitor lizard species found here include the Bengal monitor and the Water Monitor.; Other reptiles include fifteen species of turtle, such as the endemic Assam Roofed Turtle and one species of tortoise, the Brown Tortoise.; 42 species of fish are found in the area including the Tetraodon.;;



Flora
Grasslands and deciduous forests of Kaziranga
Four main types of vegetation types exist in the park.;Talukdar, B. (1995). '' Status of Swamp Deer in Kaziranga National Park''. Department of Zoology, Guwahati University, Assam.; These are alluvial inundated grasslands, alluvial savanna woodlands, tropical moist mixed deciduous forests and tropical semi-evergreen forests. Based on Landsat data for 1986, percent coverage by vegetation is: tall grasses 41%, short grasses 11%, open jungle 29%, swamps 4%, rivers and water bodies 8%, and sand 6%.;Kushwaha, S.&amp; Unni, M. (1986). Applications of remote censing techniques in forest cover monitoring and habitat evaluation - a case study at Kaziranga National Park, Assam, in, Kamat, D.&amp; Panwar, H.(eds), Wildlife Habitat Evaluation Using Remote Sensing Techniques. Indian Institute of Remote Sensing / Wildlife Institute of India, Dehra Dun. pp. 238-247;

There is a difference in altitude between the eastern and western areas, with the western side being at a lower altitude. The western reaches of the park are dominated by grasslands. Tall elephant grass is found on higher ground, while short grasses cover the lower grounds surrounding the beels or flood-created ponds.; Annual flooding, grazing by herbivores and controlled burning maintains and fertilizes the grasslands and reeds. Common tall grasses are sugarcanes, spear grass, Elephant Grass and the Common Reed. Numerous forbs are present along with the grasses. Amidst the grasses, providing cover and shade are scattered trees—dominant species including Kumbhi, Indian gooseberry, the cotton tree (in savanna woodlands), and Elephant apple (in inundated grasslands).; 

Thick evergreen forests, near the Kanchanjhuri, Panbari and Tamulipathar blocks, contain trees such as ''Aphanamixis polystachya, Talauma hodgsonii, Dillenia indica, Garcinia tinctoria, Ficus rumphii, Cinnamomum bejolghota'', and species of Syzygium. Tropical semi-evergreen forests are present near Baguri, Bimali and Haldibari. Common trees and shrubs are ''Albizia procera, Duabanga grandiflora, Lagerstroemia speciosa, Crateva unilocularis, Sterculia urens, Grewia serrulata, Mallotus philippensis, Bridelia retusa, Aphania rubra, Leea indica'' and ''Leea umbraculifera''.; Jain, S.K. and Sastry, A.R.K. (1983). ''Botany of some tiger habitats in India''. Botanical Survey of India, Howrah. p71 . ;

There are many different aquatic floras in the lakes, ponds and along the river shores. The invasive Water Hyacinth is very common, often choking the water bodies, but it is cleared during destructive floods.; Another invasive species, ''Mimosa invisa'', which is toxic to herbivores, was cleared by Kaziranga staff with help from the Wildlife Trust of India in 2005.; ''[http://www.wildlifetrustofindia.org/html/reports/Silent_Stranglers.pdf Silent Stranglers, Eradication of Mimosas in Kaziranga National Park, Assam]''; Vattakkavan et al; Occasional Report No. 12, Wildlife Trust of India, pp. 12-13(PDF). Retrieved on 2007-02-26;

Administration

A board proclaiming the biological heritage of the Park
The Wildlife wing of the forest department of the Government of Assam is responsible for the administration and management of Kaziranga, which is headquartered at Bokakhat.; The administrative head of the park is the director, who is a conservator-level officer. A divisional forest officer is the administrative chief executive of the park. He is assisted by two officers with the rank of assistant conservator of forests. The park area is divided into four ranges, overseen by range forest officers.; The four ranges are the Burapahar, Baguri, Central, and Eastern. They are headquartered at Ghorakati, Baguri, Kohora, and Agoratoli, respectively. Each range is further sub-divided into beats, headed by a forester, and sub-beats, headed by a forest guard.;

The park receives financial aid from the State Government as well as the Ministry of Environment and Forests of Government of India under various Plan and Non-Plan Budgets. Additional funding is received under the Project Elephant from the Central Government. In 1997–1998, a grant of US$ 100,000 was received under the Technical Co-operation for Security Reinforcement scheme from the World Heritage Fund.; Additional funding is also received from national &amp; international Non-governmental organizations.

Conservation management

Census figures for elephant and rhinoceros in Kaziranga

Kaziranga National Park has been granted maximum protection under the Indian law for wildlife conservation. Various laws, which include the ''Assam Forest Regulation of 1891'' and the ''Biodiversity Conservation Act of 2002'' have been enacted for protection of wildlife in the park.;Poaching activities, particularly of the rhinoceroses for its horn, has been a major concern for the authorities. Between 1980 and 2005, 567 rhinoceroses were hunted by poachers.;Following a decreasing trend for the past few years, six one-horned rhinoceroses were killed by poachers in early 2007. Reports have suggested that there are links between these poaching activities and funding of Islamist terrorism#Organisation|Islamic militant groups in Bangladesh connected to Al Qaida.;;;;
Preventive measures such as construction of anti-poaching camps and maintenance of existing ones, patrolling, intelligence gathering and control over the use of firearms around the park have reduced the number of casualties.;;;;
Controlled burning of grass in Kaziranga
Perennial flooding and heavy rains have resulted in death of wild animals and damage to the conservation infrastructures.;; To escape the water-logged areas, many animals migrate to elevated regions outside the park boundaries where they are susceptible to hunting, hit by speeding vehicles, or subject to reprisals by villagers for damaging their crops.; To mitigate the losses, the authorities have increased patrols, purchased additional speedboats for patrol, and created artificial highlands for shelter.; Several corridors have been set up for the safe passage of animals across National Highway–37 which skirts around the southern boundary of the park.;Bonal, BS &amp; Chowdhury, S (2004), ''Evaluation of barrier effect of National Highway37 on the wildlife of Kaziranga National Park and suggested strategies and planning for providing passage: A feasibility report to the Ministry of Environment &amp; Forests'', Government of India.; To prevent the spread of diseases and maintain the genetic distinctness of the wild species, systematic steps such as immunization of livestock in surrounding villages, and fencing of sensitive areas of the park, which are susceptible to encroachment by local cattle are undertaken periodically.;

Water pollution due to run-offs from pesticides from tea gardens, and a petroleum refinery at Numaligarh, are posing a hazard to the ecology of the region.;Invasive species such as Mimosa and wild rose have posed a threat to the native plants in the region. To control the growth and irradiation of invasive species, research on biological methods for controlling weeds, manual uprooting and weeding before seed settling are carried out at regular intervals.; Grassland management techniques, such as controlled burning, are effected annually to avoid forest fires.;

Visitor activities

Bonoshree Tourist Lodge in Kaziranga, maintained by Government of Assam 

Wildlife#Wildlife tourism .26 Ecotourism|Observing the wildlife, including birding, is the main visitor activity in and around the park. Guided tours by elephant or Jeep are available. Hiking is prohibited in the park to avoid potential man-animal conflicts. Observation towers are situated at Sohola, Mihimukh, Kathpara, Foliamari and Harmoti for wildlife viewing. The Lower Himalayan peaks frame the park's landscape of trees and grass interspersed with numerous ponds. An interpretation centre is being set up at the Bagori range of Kaziranga, to help the visitors know more about the park.;; The park remains closed for visitors from mid-April to mid-October due to monsoon rains. Four tourist lodges at Kohora and three tourist lodges inside the park are maintained by the Department of Environment and Forests, Government of Assam. Private resorts are available outside the park borders.; Increase in tourist inflow has led to the economic empowerment of the people living at the fringes of the park, by means of tourism related activities.; A survey of tourists notes that 80 percent found rhino sightings most enjoyable and that foreign tourists were more likely to financially support park protection and employment opportunities, while local tourists favored veterinary services.;;

Transport
Authorised guides of the forest department accompany all travellers inside the park. Mahout-guided elephant rides and Jeep or other 4WD vehicles rides are booked in advance.; Starting from the Park Administrative Centre at Kohora, these rides can follow the three motorable trails under the jurisdiction of three ranges — Kohora, Bagori and Agaratoli.; These trails are open for light vehicles from November to mid May. Visitors are allowed to take in their own vehicles only when accompanied by guides.;

Buses owned by Assam State Transport Corporation and private agencies between Guwahati, Tezpur and Upper Assam stop at the main gate of Kaziranga on NH-37 at Kohora.; The nearest town is Bokakhataway. Major cities near the park areGuwahati () and Jorhat (). Furkating , which is under the supervision of Northeast Frontier Railway, is the nearest railway station.; Jorhat Airport at Rowriah ( away), Tezpur Airport at Salonibari (approxaway) and Lokpriya Gopinath Bordoloi International Airport in Guwahati (approximatelyaway) are the nearby airports.;;

In popular culture
Kaziranga has been the theme, or has been mentioned in, several books, documentaries, and songs. The park first gained prominence after Robin Banerjee (a doctor turned photographer and filmmaker) produced a documentary titled ''Kaziranga'', which aired on Berlin television in 1961 and became a runaway success.;[http://golaghat.gov.in/PERSONAL.HTM Personalities of Golaghat district]. Retrieved on 2007-03-22;;[http://golaghat.gov.in/rabin.htm Robin Banerjee]. Retrieved on 2007-03-22;;[http://www.sentinelassam.com/sentinel_en/archives/aug0703/story5.htm ''Lover of the wild, Uncle Robin no more'']. The Sentinel (Gauhati) 2003-08-06 Retrieved on 2007-03-22; American science fiction and fantasy author, L. Sprague de Camp wrote about the park in his poem, &quot;Kaziranga, Assam&quot; . It was first published in 1970 in ''Demons and Dinosaurs'', a poetry collection, and was reprinted as ''Kaziranga'' in Years in the Making: the Time-Travel Stories of L. Sprague de Camp in 2005.;[http://www.nesfa.org/press/Books/deCamp-1.html Years in the Making: the Time-Travel Stories of L. Sprague de Camp]. NESFA.org. Retrieved on 2007-02-26;

''Kaziranga Trail'' (Children's Book Trust, 1979), a children's storybook by Arup Dutta about rhinoceros poaching in the national park, won the Shankar's Award.; Khorana, Meena. (1991). ''The Indian Subcontinent in Literature for Children and Young Adults''. Greenwood Press; The Assamese singer Bhupen Hazarika refers to Kaziranga in one of his songs.;; The BBC conservationist and travel writer Mark Shand authored a book and the corresponding BBC documentary ''Queen of the Elephants'', based on the life of the first female mahout in recent times—Parbati Barua of Kaziranga. The book went on to win the 1996 Thomas Cook Travel Book Award and the :fr:Prix littéraire de Trente millions d'amis|Prix Litteraire d'Amis, providing publicity simultaneously to the profession of mahouts, and to Kaziranga.; ;

See also
*Climate of Kaziranga National Park
*National Parks of India
*Biodiversity of Assam
*Manas National Park

Notes


Further information

*
*
*
*
*
*
*''Jaws of Death'' — a 2005 documentary by Gautam Saikia about Kaziranga animals being hit by vehicular traffic while crossing National Highway 37, winner of the Vatavaran Award.
*
*
*
*

External links

* [http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/337/ Kaziranga National Park in UNESCO List]
* [http://www.kaziranga100.com/ Kaziranga Centenary 1905-2005]
* [http://www.wcmc.org.uk/protected_areas/data/wh/kazirang.html World Conservation Monitoring Centre]
* [http://www.assamforest.co.in/NP_Sanctuaries/np_Kaziranga.php Department of Environment and Forests (Government of Assam) - Kaziranga]
* 






Category:Geography of Assam
Category:National parks of India
Category:Tourism in Assam
Category:Kaziranga National Park

de:Kaziranga-Nationalpark
es:Parque Nacional de Kaziranga
fr:Kaziranga National Park
pl:Park Narodowy Kaziranga
fi:Kazirangan kansallispuisto
sv:Kaziranga nationalpark
te:కాజీరంగా