Image:Hohenheim of Light (FMA).JPG|thumb|right|275px|Hohenheim, in &quot;Hohenheim of Light&quot;.

In the anime and manga series ''Fullmetal Alchemist'', Hohenheim is the father of the protagonists, Edward and Alphonse Elric. He is a brilliant and well-known alchemist. He left Ed, Al, and their mother Minor characters of Fullmetal Alchemist#Trisha Elric|Trisha when Al was a baby and Ed was very young. Years later, Ed still holds a grudge against him for abandoning his mother, which he believes contributed to her death. Hohenheim is voiced by Masashi Ebara in the anime and by Scott McNeil in the English version.

In the anime
Approximately four centuries old in soul, forty years old in his current body, 'Hohenheim of Light' remains behind the scenes throughout most of the series. Most of his past is kept under wraps, save for a few key points, revealed quite late in the series. Hohenheim is a tall, rather well-built man, standing in at at least six feet tall at first glance. He's rather gentle and weary, and soft-spoken as well, which is most likely due to the extensive amount of time spent alive, under his assorted burdens. This disposition is clearly demonstrated when Edward actually punches him in the face and kicks him in the stomach, with very little reaction. In the anime, he sports dirty-blonde hair and gray eyes, causing him to bear a stronger resemblance to Alphonse, while in the manga, he has golden-blonde hair and gold eyes, causing him to look more like Edward (although in the manga Alphonse is also a true blonde with golden eyes). He is shown to be an extremely powerful alchemist, possibly the strongest in the series, showcasing his talents in transmuting light (hence his nickname) in episode 45, &quot;A Rotted Heart&quot;.

In the anime, Hohenheim's official debut is in episode 43, &quot;The Stray Dog&quot;. Here, he meets Winry, confusing her for a woman named Sara. Winry promptly flees, but soon realizes that since Sara was her mother's name she may have been taken for her mother. Hohenheim then appears at the Rockbell residence, where Pinako introduces him as Ed and Al's father.

His past is fairly murky, save for a few key moments shown in the series. Approximately four hundred years prior to the series, Hohenheim created the Philosopher's Stone, using people captured in a witch hunt. The resulting reaction nearly caused Hohenheim's death, but out of love and concern for her lover, Dante used the stone to attach his soul to another man's body. It's from here on out that the two jump from body to body, living on, and obtaining a so-called eternal life, although Hohenheim had only intended to live as long as the stone lasted, alongside Dante. It's not known if Dante and Hohenheim were actually ever married, but their relationship produced one son, who died prematurely of mercury poisoning. Hohenheim performed a human transmutation on his son, which, in turn, failed, producing the first-ever Homunculus, Envy. Regretting what he had done to his son, Hohenheim fled (although he left Dante some of the Stone). Later, Hohenheim renounces ever truly loving Dante, stating Trisha Elric as the only woman he ever truly loved. 

Where Hohenheim was in the ten-year gap between his leaving the Elrics and turning up again isn't exactly clear. He had explained to Trisha shortly before his departure that he was leaving to do research of some kind, but never came back. In episode 50, &quot;Death&quot;, it is revealed that Hohenheim's stolen bodies rot more quickly every time he takes a new one. Also knowing that Dante was out there, somewhere, he assumed that staying in hiding would, perhaps, make her vanish for good. But once he found out that Dante had her eyes set on his sons, he emerged to face her, only to be immobilized by the Homunculus Sloth, who bore a striking resemblance to his late wife Trisha, and was consequently sent into the Gate, where his mind, body, and soul were separated. He was able to reassemble himself, however, and emerge on the other side, in London, and eventually becomes an advisor to Winston Churchill. When Ed arrives there in episodes 50 and 51 (the latter named &quot;Laws and Promises&quot; in the English dub), he learns about his past. When he offers to find a way to bring Hohenheim back to their home world, he declines, saying he would rather stay in our world and live the remainder of his life in the body that Trisha loved. At the end of the series, he is living in Germany, siding himself with the Thule Society, secretly finding a way to reunite his sons again. He also took Edward into his care during this time.

In the movie, Hohenheim doesn't appear much, save for a couple of pivotal scenes. Edward has left his care by the time the movie begins. Hohenheim is used as a sacrifice on Germany's side of the Gate, fixed in the mouth of Envy, who became a serpent at the end of the series. He tells Edward that he is a sinner, performing the forbidden human transmutation on his eldest son, that many people died because of him and to give Alphonse his regards. Despite Edward's pleas not to, he closes Envy's jaws, killing himself, his blood activating the transmutation circle above.

In the manga
;
In the manga, he is introduced as Van Hohenheim when he returns to Resembool. There he discovers that his house has been burned down, encounters a very hostile Edward in front of Trisha's grave, and plants the suggestion that the creature Ed and Al created when attempting to resurrect Trisha might not have even been a bad copy of her, but something quite unrelated. Before leaving, he warns Pinako Rockbell to leave the country for her safety. After he leaves Resembool with a family portrait of himself, his sons, and his wife tucked into his jacket, his carriage is held up by bandits, who promptly retreat after shooting Hohenheim multiple times, to no effect apart from damaging his clothes. In Chapter 67 it is revealed that he has or is the philosopher's stone. Therefore he has a body similar to the body of &quot;Father,&quot; the creator of the seven Homunculi. Notably, they look almost alike, except that &quot;Father&quot; seems to have aged a great deal more, and even more interestingly,Hohenheim addresses the souls in the Stone he takes from his body by name. However, Hiromu Arakawa, the creator of Fullmetal Alchemist, had for a long time been very ambiguous about whether Hohenheim is &quot;Father.&quot;In chapter 54, it was established that &quot;Father&quot; is not Hohenheim - the manga shows Hohenheim in a completely different place during Ed and Al's encounter with &quot;Father.&quot;However,the two are clearly connected, considering how &quot;Father&quot; enthusiastically asks Edward about what had become of Hohenheim, and then utters the crypic statement &quot;Of course it wouldn't have died.&quot;In Chapter 73, Father lists Hohenheim as one of his potential sacrifices.

In chapter 68, Hohenheim states that he has lived for a long time and that he thought it wasn't too bad to &quot;accept this body and live on...Until I met you, Trisha and had children.&quot; He says that Trisha knew that he had the body of &quot;a monster&quot; yet still cared for him. His departure from Resembool was part of his search for a means to become mortal, so that he could age and die with Trisha, Edward, and Alphonse (meaning, of course, that he missed the end of her life and their childhoods), although the main reason for his departure was due to him discovering the secret of the shape of Amestris and deduced that Father was planning to repeat his action in Xerxes, and thusHohenheim leaves to stop him.

Hohenheim's furthest past is at last revealed in chapter 74. He is shown as an adolescent boy who looks and acts very like Edward, although he is not short. At this time, he is an illiterate slave in ancient Xerxes, known as Number 23. Very little is shown of his country, but the people's manner of dressing is reminiscent both of the Ishbalans (though they physically resemble Amestirans) and of the garments worn by the character Father. As Number 23 mops the floor in his master's laboratory, a homunculus in a flask addresses him. Hohenheim's blood had been used in the creation of this, the first homunculus. As a sign of gratitude, the homunculus gives him a name (the name was originally Theophilatus Bombastus Van Hohenheim, but was shortened to Hohenheim so it could be easily remembered, mostly because the homunculus believed Hohenheim to be far too stupid to remember the whole thing). Lastly, the homunculus tells Hohenheim that it can give him knowledge. Homunculus teaches Hohenheim reading, writing and basic alchemy. As a result of this knowledge, Hohenheim becomes his master's assistant and his life greatly improves.

The homunculus presents the King of Xerxes with what he says is the secret to immortality. After the King creates a massive transmutation circle around Xerxes, the circle is activated, with Hohenheim and the homunculus secretly in its center. As the country and people, including the King, are consumed by the array, Hohenheim is brought before the Doors of Truth. When he is returned to the dead land of Xerxes, he reencounters Homunculus, who has crafted a copy of Hohenheim's body to inhabit for itself. As a 'gift' for helping him and being the source of his life, Homunculus also rebuilt Hohenheim's body into an immortal one like those the other homunculi would one day have. The souls Hohenheim addresses hundreds of years later are doubtless people he once knew in his youth in Xerxes, who died for his and Homunculus's bodies. Some of the names of the souls he addresses in Chapter 67 include the people he called out to after returning from the Doors.Hohenheim, once human, is immortal, and as he later tells to Izumi Curtis, is a &quot;Philosopher's Stone in human form&quot;.
He is seen stabbing Izumi Curtis by his hand and healing her, but then Izumi's husband comes and stops Hohenheim. Izumi says that it is easier to breath and then Hohenheim tells that he is a Philosopher's Stone.

Hohenheim then moves on to Liore, where he meets Rose. She and the Old Shopkeeper lead him to an underground reservoir, where he leaves them and has a short battle with Pride. He tells Pride to tell Father that &quot;Number 23&quot; is coming.

Trivia

Van Hohenheim is based on Phillip von Hohenheim, who later changed his name to Philippus Theophrastus Aureolus Bombastus von Hohenheim. Also known as Paracelsus, he was an alchemist, physician, astrologer, and general occultist. Philippus von Hohenheim once claimed that he had created a false human being that he referred to as the homunculus This theory seems to be supported in Chapter 74.In a flashback, a homunculus created using Hoenhein's blood attempts to give him a name, since Hoenhein was a slave then, and was only identified as &quot;Number 23.&quot;The homunculus first names him Theofilatos Bombastus Van Hohenheim, but Hohenhein interrupts him, complaining that the name is too long.The homunculus then simply names him Van Hohenheim.



Category:Fictional alchemists
Category:Fullmetal Alchemist characters
Category:German anime and manga characters
Category:Fictional centenarians

es:Hohenheim (Fullmetal Alchemist)
fr:Hohenheim
pt:Hohenheim