
|Origin = Warren, Ohio
|Death = 
|Genre = Rock, alternative rock, Hard rock
|Occupation = Musician
|Years_active = 1986-present
|Instrument = Drums;Vocals;Guitar; Bass;Piano
|Label =
|Associated_acts = Foo Fighters;Nirvana;Scream;Probot;Queens of the Stone Age;
|URL = 
}}
David Eric Grohl (b. January 14 1969, Warren, Ohio) is an American rock musician and songwriter. Grohl began his music career in the 1980s as the drummer for several Washington, DC area bands, including the punk rock band Scream. In 1990 he became the drummer for grunge group Nirvana. Following the April 1994 death of Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain, Grohl formed the Foo Fighters.

Early life
When Grohl was a young child, his family (father James, mother Virginia, and older sister Lisa) relocated from Ohio to Springfield, Virginia,;[http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/08/16/AR2006081601673.html Dave Grohl, Unplugged but Hardly Quiet]; a suburb of Washington, DC.Three years later, his parents divorced, and Grohl grew up living with his mother.

At the age of twelve, Grohl began tinkering with the guitar.He started with lessons, but eventually grew tired of them, and began to play in bands with friends.A year later, a summer stay at his cousin's house spawned Grohl's interest in punk rock.Grohl's cousin Tracy took him to numerous punk shows during that summer, and Grohl returned to Springfield as a convert.

Over the next several years, Grohl played in several local bands, including a stint on guitar in a band called Freak Baby.At the same time, he had been teaching himself to play drums by banging on various items in his bedroom.When Freak Baby kicked out its bass player, Grohl decided to switch to drums, and the new band called themselves Mission Impossible.;Azerrad, Michael. ''Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana''. Doubleday, 1993.ISBN 0-385-47199-8, p. 149; 
He later joined a hardcore/post-punk band called Dain Bramage.During his developing years as a drummer, Grohl cited John Bonham as his greatest influence, and eventually had Bonham's :Image:Zoso.svg|three-circle logo tattooed on his wrist.;http://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/5940050/14_led_zeppelin;

Grohl attended the former Thomas Jefferson High School as a freshman and sophomore.During his junior year, he briefly attended Bishop Ireton High School in Alexandria, before transferring to Annandale High School.

Career
= Scream= 

At the age of seventeen, Grohl scored an audition with local DC favorites Scream to fill the vacancy left by the departure of drummer Kent Stax. In order to try out for the audition, Grohl had lied about his age claiming he was 20.; Lynskey, Dorian. &quot;[http://www.fooarchive.com/features/arena2002.htm The Man Who Fell To Earth]&quot;. ''Arena''. December 2002.; To Grohl's surprise, the band asked him to join.After waffling for a brief period, Grohl accepted the offer.Not long after, he dropped out of high school to play drums full-time.Over the next four years, Grohl toured extensively with the band, recording a couple of live albums and two studio albums, ''No More Censorship'' and ''Fumble'', on which Grohl penned and sang vocals on the song &quot;Gods Look Down&quot;.

While playing in Scream, Grohl became a fan of The Melvins and eventually befriended the band.During a 1990 tour stop on the west coast, The Melvins' Buzz Osborne took a couple of his friends, Kurt Cobain and Krist Novoselic, to see the band.

= Nirvana= 

A few months later, Scream unexpectedly disbanded following the departure of its bass player, and Grohl placed a phone call to Osborne for advice.Knowing how much Cobain and Novoselic liked Grohl's drumming, Osborne gave Novoselic's phone number to Grohl.Novoselic invited Grohl to Seattle, where Grohl attended Nirvana's infamous show at the Motor Sports Garage, the one Nirvana show that featured Dan Peters on drums.(Grohl admitted to ''Rolling Stone'' in 2005 that he spent most of Nirvana's set outside talking to a friend.)Grohl subsequently auditioned for the band, and soon joined them full-time.

At the time that Grohl joined Nirvana, the band had already recorded several demos for what would be the follow-up to their debut album ''Bleach'', having spent time recording with producer Butch Vig in Wisconsin.Initially, the plans were to release the album on Sub Pop, but the band found itself receiving a great deal of major label interest based on the demos.Grohl spent the initial months with Nirvana travelling to various major labels as the band shopped for a deal, eventually signing with DGC Records.In the spring of 1991, the band entered the studio to record the album.
''Pocketwatch'' cover
Upon its release, ''Nevermind'' exceeded all expectations and became a massive success, catapulting the band to worldwide stardom.At the same time, Grohl found himself fighting with his status in the band.While his drumming style was a significant element in the band's success, Grohl saw himself as just another in a long line of drummers.In his mind, Nirvana was the band that recorded ''Bleach''; his arrival had altered that sound dramatically, and, as he saw it, not necessarily in a positive way.Though Grohl had been writing songs for several years, he declined to introduce his songs to the band for fear of damaging the band's chemistry.Instead, Grohl compiled his songs and recorded them himself, releasing a cassette called ''Pocketwatch'' in 1992 on indie label Simple Machines.Rather than using his own name, Grohl released the cassette under the pseudonym &quot;Late!&quot;.

In the later years of Nirvana, Grohl's songwriting contributions increased.In Grohl's initial months in Seattle, Cobain overheard him working on a song called &quot;Color Pictures of a Marigold&quot;, and the two ended up jamming on it.Grohl would later record the song for the ''Pocketwatch'' cassette.During the sessions for ''In Utero'', he decided to re-record the song, and the band released this version as a b-side on the &quot;Heart-Shaped Box&quot; single, titled simply &quot;Marigold&quot;.Earlier, as the band worked on new material for ''In Utero'', Grohl contributed the main guitar riff for what ended up becoming &quot;Scentless Apprentice&quot;.Cobain conceded in a late 1993 MTV interview that he initially thought the riff was &quot;kind of boneheaded&quot;, but was gratified at how the song developed (a process captured in part in a demo on the Nirvana box set ''With the Lights Out'').Cobain noted that he was excited at the possibility of having Novoselic and Grohl contribute more to the band's songwriting.

Prior to their 1994 European tour, the band decided to schedule session time at Robert Lang Studios in Seattle to work on demos.For most of the three-day session, Cobain was absent, so Novoselic and Grohl worked on demos of their own songs.The duo completed several of Grohl's, including future Foo Fighters songs &quot;Exhausted&quot;, &quot;Big Me&quot;, &quot;February Stars&quot;, and &quot;Butterflies&quot;. On the third day of the session, Cobain finally arrived, and the band recorded a demo of a song later named &quot;You Know You're Right&quot;.It was the band's final studio recording.

= Foo Fighters= 

Following Cobain's death in April of 1994, Grohl retreated, unsure of where to go and what to do with himself.In October of 1994, Grohl scheduled studio time, again at Robert Lang's Studio, and quickly recorded a fifteen-track demo.With the exception of a single guitar part on &quot;X-Static&quot; played by Greg Dulli of the Afghan Whigs, Grohl performed all of the instruments himself.

At the same time, Grohl wondered if his future might be in drumming for other bands.In November, Grohl took a brief turn with Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, including a memorable performance on ''Saturday Night Live''.Petty asked him to join permanently, but Grohl realized that his future lay elsewhere.Grohl's name was also rumored as a possible replacement for Pearl Jam drummer Dave Abbruzzese, and Grohl even performed with the band for a song or two at three shows during Pearl Jam's March 1995 Australian tour.However, by then, Pearl Jam had already settled on Jack Irons, and Grohl had other plans in the works.

After passing the demo around, Grohl found himself with considerable major label interest.Nirvana's A&amp;R rep Gary Gersh had subsequently taken over as President of Capitol Records and lured Grohl to sign with the label.Grohl did not want the effort to be considered the start of a solo career so he recruited other band members: former Nirvana touring guitarist Pat Smear, and two members of the band Sunny Day Real Estate, William Goldsmith (drums) and Nate Mendel (bass).Rather than re-record the album, Grohl's demo was given a professional mix by Rob Schnapf and Tom Rothrock and was released in July of 1995 as the Foo Fighters' debut album.

At the end of 1995, the Foo Fighters were asked to contribute a song to the soundtrack to the television show ''The X-Files''.During a break between tours, the band entered the studio and recorded a cover of Gary Numan's &quot;Down in the Park&quot;.In February of 1996, Grohl and his then-wife Jennifer Youngblood made a brief cameo appearance on the X-Files third season episode &quot;Pusher&quot;.(The two can be spotted entering the FBI building, with Grohl pausing to look at his watch.)

''Touch'' soundtrack album coverAfter touring for the self-titled album for more than a year, Grohl returned home and began work on the soundtrack to the 1997 movie ''Touch''.Grohl performed all of the instruments and vocals himself, save for vocals from Veruca Salt singer Louise Post on the title track, and vocals and guitar by X (U.S. band)|X's John Doe on &quot;This Loving Thing (Lynn's Song)&quot;.Grohl completed the recording in two weeks, and immediately joined the Foo Fighters to work on their follow-up.

In the midst of the initial sessions for the Foo Fighters' second album, tension emerged between Grohl and Goldsmith.Grohl felt that Goldsmith's efforts weren't as strong as they needed to be, and opted to re-record some of Goldsmith's drum parts himself.Goldsmith, who found himself battling carpal tunnel syndrome from years of pounding the drums, was upset by Grohl's action, and quit the band. (In subsequent interviews, Grohl conceded that the band may have moved into the studio too quickly after the lengthy touring for the debut.)Grohl and the rest of the band decided to scrap the Seattle sessions and start over in Los Angeles with Grohl behind the kit. 

The effort was released in May of 1997 as the band's second album, ''The Colour and the Shape'', which eventually cemented the Foo Fighters as a staple of rock radio.The album spawned several hits, including &quot;Everlong&quot;, &quot;My Hero&quot;, and &quot;Monkey Wrench&quot;.Just prior to the album's release, former Alanis Morissette drummer Taylor Hawkins joined the band on drums.The following September, Smear left the band, citing a need to settle down following a lifetime of touring.Smear was subsequently replaced by Grohl's former Scream bandmate Franz Stahl.(Stahl departed the band prior to recording of the Foo's third album and was replaced by touring guitarist Chris Shiflett, who later became a full-fledged member during the recording of ''One by One''.)

Grohl's life of non-stop touring and travel continued with the Foo Fighters' popularity.During his infrequent pauses he lived in Seattle and Los Angeles before returning to Alexandria, Virginia. It was there that he turned his basement into a recording studio where the 1999 album ''There Is Nothing Left to Lose'' was recorded.

In 2000, the band recruited Queen guitarist Brian May to add some guitar flourish to a cover of Pink Floyd's &quot;Have a Cigar&quot;, a song which the Foo Fighters previously recorded as a b-side.The friendship between the two bands resulted in Grohl and Taylor Hawkins being asked to induct Queen into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2001.Grohl and Hawkins joined May and Queen drummer Roger Meddows-Taylor|Roger Taylor to perform &quot;Tie Your Mother Down&quot;, with Grohl standing in on vocals for the late Freddie Mercury.(May later contributed guitar work for the song &quot;Tired of You&quot; on the ensuing Foo Fighters album, as well as on an unreleased Foo Fighters song called &quot;Knucklehead&quot;.)
Queens of the Stone Age's ''Songs for the Deaf''

Near the end of 2001, the Foo Fighters returned to the studio to work on their fourth album.After four months in the studio, with the sessions &quot;finished&quot;, Grohl accepted an invitation to join Queens of the Stone Age and helped them to record their 2002 album ''Songs for the Deaf''.(Grohl can be seen drumming for the band in the video for the song &quot;No One Knows&quot;.)After a brief US tour with the band and feeling rejuvenated by the effort, Grohl recalled the other Foo Fighters to completely re-record their album at his studio in Virginia.The effort became their fourth album, ''One by One''.While initially pleased with the results, in another 2005 ''Rolling Stone'' interview, Dave Grohl admitted to not liking the record:&quot;Four of the songs were good, and the other seven I never played again in my life. We rushed into it, and we rushed out of it.&quot;

Grohl and the Foo Fighters released their fifth album ''In Your Honor'' on June 14, 2005.Prior to starting work on the album, the band spent almost a year relocating Grohl's home-based Virginia studio to a brand new facility, dubbed Studio 606, located in a warehouse near Los Angeles.Featuring collaborations with John Paul Jones of Led Zeppelin, Josh Homme of Queens of the Stone Age and Norah Jones, the album was a departure from previous efforts, and included one rock and one acoustic disc.

Foo Fighters's sixth studio album ''Echoes, Silence, Patience &amp; Grace'' was released on September 25, 2007. It was recorded during a three month period between March 2007 and June 2007, and its release was preceded by the first single &quot;The Pretender&quot; on September 17th.

= Other projects= 
Apart from his main bands, Grohl has been involved in other music projects. In 1992, Grohl played drums on Buzz Osborne's Kiss-styled solo-EP ''King Buzzo'', where he was credited as ''Dale Nixon'', a pseudonym that Greg Ginn adopted to play bass on Black Flag's ''My War''. 

In 1993, Grohl was recruited to help recreate the music of The Beatles' early years for the movie ''Backbeat''. Grohl played drums in an &quot;all-star&quot; lineup that included Greg Dulli of the Afghan Whigs, indie producer Don Fleming, Mike Mills of R.E.M. (band)|R.E.M., Thurston Moore of Sonic Youth, and Dave Pirner of Soul Asylum.A music video was filmed for the song &quot;Money (That's What I Want)&quot; while Grohl was with Nirvana on their 1994 European tour, but footage of Grohl was filmed later and included.

That same year, Grohl was among a group of investors that founded the DC nightclub,The Black Cat. ;

Later in 1994, Grohl played drums on two tracks for Mike Watt's ''Ball-Hog or Tugboat?''. In early 1995, Grohl and the Foo Fighters played their first US tour opening for Watt, and helped make up Watt's supporting band.Nicknamed the &quot;Ringspiel&quot; tour, Watt's band featured Grohl and William Goldsmith on drums, Eddie Vedder and Pat Smear on guitar, and Watt on bass.

Grohl at the Roskilde Festival in 2005
During the early 2000s, Grohl spent time in his basement studio writing and recording a number of songs for a &quot;metal&quot; project.Over the span of several years, Grohl recruited his favorite metal vocalists from the 1980s, including Lemmy of Motörhead, Conrad &quot;Cronos&quot; Lant from Venom, and Max Cavalera of Sepultura, to perform the vocals for the songs. The project was released in 2004 under the moniker Probot.

Also in 2003, Grohl stepped behind the kit to perform on Killing Joke's self-titled album.The move surprised some Nirvana fans, given that Nirvana had been accused of stealing the opening riff of &quot;Come as You Are&quot; from Killing Joke's 1984 song &quot;Eighties&quot;.However, the controversy failed to create a lasting rift between the bands.The Foo Fighters made a habit of covering Killing Joke's &quot;Requiem&quot; during the late 1990s, and were even joined by Killing Joke singer Jaz Coleman for a performance of the song at a show in New Zealand in 2003.

Grohl lent his drumming skills to other artists during the early 2000s. In 2000, Dave played drums and sang on a track, &quot;Goodbye Lament&quot;, from Tony Iommi's album ''Iommi''.In 2001, Grohl performed on Tenacious D's debut album, and appeared in the video for lead single &quot;Tribute&quot; as a demon. He later appeared in the duo's 2006 movie ''Tenacious D in: The Pick of Destiny'' as Beelzeboss and performed on its soundtrack.In 2002, Grohl helped Chan Marshall of Cat Power on the album ''You Are Free''.In 2004, Grohl drummed on several tracks for Nine Inch Nails' 2005 album ''With Teeth''.He also drummed on the song &quot;Bad Boyfriend&quot; on Garbage's 2005 album ''Bleed Like Me''. Most recently, he recorded all the drums on Juliette and the Licks's 2006 album ''Four on the Floor'' and the song &quot;For Us&quot; from Pete Yorn's 2006 album ''Nightcrawler''.Beyond drumming, Grohl contributed guitar to a cover of Neil Young's &quot;I've Been Waiting For You&quot; on David Bowie's 2002 album ''Heathen''.

Personal life
Grohl has been married twice. He was first married to photographer Jennifer Youngblood from 1993 to 1997. After their divorce, Grohl had relationships with Louise Post from Veruca Salt, solo artist and Hole bassist Melissa Auf der Maur, and pro-snowboarder Tina Basich.

He then went on to marry his second wife, former MTV producer Jordyn Blum on August 2, 2003, at their home in Los Angeles. Guests included Clive Davis, Jack Black, and former Nirvana bandmate, Krist Novoselic. On April 15, 2006, Grohl and his wife welcomed their first child, daughter Violet Maye, in Los Angeles. She was named after Grohl's maternal grandmother. Earlier that year, Foo Fighters bandmate Taylor Hawkins told MTV, &quot;We're going to be touring Europe in January and February, but we've got to be home by March, because Dave and his wife are having a baby,&quot; he said, adding, &quot;but I probably wasn't supposed to tell you that.&quot; Grohl said that he had been playing music to his unborn child, saying she &quot;likes The Beatles. Doesn't really get down to The Beach Boys. Digs Mozart.&quot; 

In May 2006, Grohl sent a note of support to the two trapped miners in the Beaconsfield mine collapse in Tasmania, Australia. In the initial days following the collapse, one of the men requested an iPod withFoo Fighters songs to be sent down to them through a small hole.Grohl's note read, in part, &quot;Though I'm halfway around the world right now, my heart is with you both, and I want you to know that when you come home, there's two tickets to any Foos show, anywhere, and two cold beers waiting for yo;us. Deal?&quot;;[http://www.stereoboard.com/content/view/181/46/ Daniel, Troy.&quot;Foo Fighters' Dave Grohl Helps Trapped Miners&quot;.]Stereoboard.com.May 9, 2006.; In October 2006, one of the miners took up his offer, joining Grohl for a drink after the Foo Fighters acoustic concert at the Sydney Opera House.;McCabe, Kathy.[http://www.news.com.au/dailytelegraph/story/0,22049,20523196-5001021,00.html &quot;Rocker has a miner problem&quot;].''The Daily Telegraph''.October 4, 2006.;Grohl wrote an instrumental piece for the meeting, which Grohl pledged he would include on the band's next album.;Cohen, Jonathan.[http://www.billboard.com/bbcom/news/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1003608301 &quot;Foo Fighters Let It Rip On Sixth Album&quot;].Billboard.com.July 6, 2007.;The song appears on the Foo Fighters' latest release ''Echoes, Silence, Patience &amp; Grace'', titled &quot;Ballad of the Beaconsfield Miners&quot;.

References


External links


*
*[http://www.foofighters.com Foo Fighters official website]
*[http://www.fooarchive.com FooArchive - An archive of Dave interviews 95-present]









;

|PLACE OF BIRTH=Warren, Ohio, U.S.
|DATE OF DEATH=
|PLACE OF DEATH=
}}


Category:Living people
Category:1969 births
Category:American male singers
Category:American multi-instrumentalists
Category:American music video directors
Category:American rock drummers
Category:American rock guitarists
Category:American rock singers
Category:American songwriters
Category:American singer-songwriters
Category:Backing vocalists
Category:Foo Fighters members
Category:Grunge musicians
Category:Nirvana members
Category:Ohio musicians
Category:People from Warren, Ohio
Category:People from Fairfax County, Virginia
Category:Queens of the Stone Age members
Category:Scream members
Category:Virginia musicians

bg:Дейв Грол
cs:Dave Grohl
da:Dave Grohl
de:Dave Grohl
et:Dave Grohl
es:Dave Grohl
fr:Dave Grohl
ga:Dave Grohl
gl:Dave Grohl
ko:데이브 그롤
hr:Dave Grohl
id:Dave Grohl
is:Dave Grohl
it:Dave Grohl
he:דייב גרוהל
lt:Dave Grohl
nl:Dave Grohl
ja:デイヴ・グロール
no:Dave Grohl
nn:Dave Grohl
pl:Dave Grohl
pt:Dave Grohl
ru:Грол, Дейв
simple:Dave Grohl
sk:Dave Grohl
sr:Дејв Грол
fi:Dave Grohl
sv:Dave Grohl
tr:Dave Grohl‎‎