
;

;;;;;;;;;
|website= [http://www.owu.edu/ http://www.owu.edu]
;

}} 

Ohio Wesleyan University (also known as Wesleyan or OWU) is a private liberal arts college in Delaware, Ohio, United States. It was founded in 1842 by Methodist leaders and Central Ohio residents as a nonsectarian institution, and is a member of the Ohio Five — a consortium of Ohio liberal arts colleges.;; Ohio Wesleyan has always admitted students irrespective of religion or race and maintained that the university &quot;is forever to be conducted on the most liberal principles.&quot;;Alexander, William M. &quot;Ohio Wesleyan University&quot;. ''Peabody Journal of Education'', Vol. 38, No. 4 (Jan., 1961), pp. 200–203.;;; In this capacity, Ohio Wesleyan has espoused internationalism and community activism.;Tull, p.40, pp.127–132.;

The 200-acre (81&amp;nbsp;ha) site is 20&amp;nbsp;miles (32&amp;nbsp;km) north of Columbus, Ohio.It includes the main academic and residential campus, the Perkins Observatory, and the Kraus Wilderness Preserve.;;

In 2005, Ohio Wesleyan had the ninth highest percentage of international students among liberal arts colleges for the twelfth straight year.;U.S. News &amp; World Report (2005), p. 4.; ''U.S. News &amp; World Report'' ranked Ohio Wesleyan 95th among U.S. liberal arts colleges in its 2007 edition.;; Notable alumni include former U.S. Vice President Charles W. Fairbanks and Nobel Laureate Frank Sherwood Rowland.;;

History


=Founding=
The Sulphur Spring, renovated in 2005, was a major vacation spot for health seekers in the 1830s.

In 1841, Ohio residents Adam Poe and Charles Elliott decided to establish a university &quot;of the highest order&quot; in central Ohio.;Williams, p. 15.; To that end, they purchased the List of Ohio Wesleyan University buildings#Elliott Hall|Mansion House Hotel, a former health resort with its Sulfur Spring, using funds raised from local residents.;;;; Poe and Elliott wrote a charter emphasizing &quot;the democratic spirit of teaching&quot;, which was approved by the Ohio State Legislature. Early in the following year they opened the college preparatory Academy and formed a Board of Trustees.;Hubbart, p. 14.; Ohio Wesleyan University, named (like several other U.S. colleges and universities) after John Wesley, founder of Methodism, opened on November 13, 1844 as a Methodist-related but nonsectarian institution, with a College of Liberal Arts for male students.;White, p. 229.;;;;; 

Ohio Wesleyan's first president, Edward Thomson, stated in his inaugural address on August 5, 1846 that the school was &quot;a product of the liberality of the local people.&quot;;Hubbart, p. 22.; This liberal philosophycontributed to Wesleyan's vocal opposition to slavery in the 1850s.;;;;;Hubbart, pp. 38.; In the annual celebration for George Washington's birthday in 1862, second president Frederick Merrick endorsed Ohio Wesleyan's &quot;ideals of democracy&quot; during his oration.;Hubbart, p. 38.;

=Curriculum growth and fundraising=
Elliott Hall, the first college building on campus, was renovated in 2000 and is Ohio's oldest collegiate Greek Revival building.;[http://www.owu.edu/news/2000/corns.html Renovated MUB Debuts as R.W. Corns Building]. Ohio Wesleyan University, 2000-08-03.Retrieved on 2007-01-08.;

During the mid-19th century, Ohio Wesleyan focused on attracting students, adding fields of study, and fundraising, by which it significantly increased its endowment.;Hubbart, p. 45.; List of Ohio Wesleyan University buildings#Sturges Hall|Sturges Hall was constructed as the University's first library in 1855.;; In 1873, the school added the Department of Natural History housed in History of Ohio Wesleyan University#Campus expansion|Merrick Hall.;; The Ohio Wesleyan Female College, established in 1853, merged with Wesleyan in 1877.;Taylor, p.53.;;; Between 1876 and 1888, enrollment tripled and music education greatly increased, yet no major buildings were built in this time.;Hubbart, p. 68.;;Hubbart, pp. 72–80.;

By the end of the 19th century, Ohio Wesleyan had added a School of Music (1877), School of Fine Arts (1877), School of Oratory (1894), and Business School (1895) to the original College of Liberal Arts (founded in 1844).;Kukula, R. &amp; K. Trubner (1923). ''Minerva: Jahrbuch der Gelehrten Welt''. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter and Company; To address the need for new departments and specialized instruction, the administration improved the facilities and courses to make them on par with OWU's new academic position. List of Ohio Wesleyan University buildings#University Hall|University Hall, List of Ohio Wesleyan University buildings#Slocum Hall|Slocum Library, extensions to the Monnett campus, and athletic facilities were all constructed during that period.;Hubbart, pp. 87–88.;
University Hall, built in 1893 on the academic quad, features Neoromanesque architecture.
Between 1891 and 1895, Wesleyan specialized the curriculum by establishing departments for physics, zoology, geology, speech, history, French, English, and economics.;Hubbart, p. 90.; This specialization encouraged undergraduates to continue studies at graduate level, allowed professional preparation for the Doctor of Philosophy degree, and promoted exchange study in Europe.; ; Two professional schools for law and medicine were formed in 1896.

In 1905, the Board of Trustees decided to keep Ohio Wesleyan a college, despite the expansion of the curriculum and campus and the word &quot;university&quot; in the institution's name.;Hubbart, p. 110.; The Bachelor of Science degree was abolished, which left only the Bachelor of Arts. Two students were selected as Rhodes Scholars in 1905 and 1909.;Hubbart, p. 112.; Edwards Gymnasium was built in 1906.;; In 1907, the United Societies of Phi Beta Kappa, the oldest undergraduate honor society in the United States, installed the &quot;Eta of Ohio&quot; ΦΒΚ chapter on campus.;; In 1909, the school added History of Ohio Wesleyan University#Campus expansion|Sanborn Hall, housing the Music Department.;;

In the 1920s, academic requirements for the bachelor's degree were reduced, and Latin and mathematics were no longer emphasized.;Hubbart, p. 142.; During the presidency of John W. Hoffman (1916–1928), the Academy and School of Business were closed; the Academy had started in 1842 as a University-preparatory school|preparatory school, and throughout its seventy-five years frequently outnumbered the college in enrollment.;Hubbart, p. 127.; Also in the 1920s, the chapel service was dropped and sororities were formed. Wesleyan also increased the number of buildings on campus, including Selby Stadium, Austin Manor, and Perkins Observatory; another building, Stuyvesant Hall, was in planning; and Edgar Hall was opened.;Hubbart, p. 141.;

=Years of change, 1930–1984=
Stuyvesant Hall, built in 1930, is the oldest residence in use on West Campus.
During the Great Depression, both enrollment and alumni donations shrank.;Hubbart, pp.140–160.; While the faculty size remained stable, lack of tuition and alumni revenues precipitated financial problems which threatened the college's survival in the administrations of Edmund P. Soper (1928–1938) and Herbert John Burgstahler (1938–1949).;Tull, p.180.; 

The administration adjusted the curriculum during the early 1930s to address these problems.;Hubbart, pp. 160–164.; Greek and Latin declined, while business administration and economics thrived and the highest enrollments were in the social sciences, English, pre-medicine, and history. The registrar reported that, in these years, the number of students from New England states, urban Ohio areas, and from international locations increased. By the 1930s, the Methodist students were a minority among the student body;;Burtchaell, pp. 174–175;; formal ties to the Methodist church were severed in the 1920s;Burtchaell, p.304–319.; and led to debate among Board members in the 1930s, eventually resulting in the university's current active but loose historical affiliation with the United Methodist Church.;Burtchaell, p.323.; In a study into the relationship between American educational institutions and the Christian denominations they were historically affiliated with, James Tunstead Burtuchell writes that it was during this period that “in its personnel, its resources, and its students”, Wesleyan lost its “symbiotic intimacy with the United Methodist Church.”;Burtchaell, p. 326.; In a study into the relationship between American educational institutions and the Christian denominations they were historically affiliated with, James Tunstead Burtuchell writes that it was during this period that “in its personnel, its resources, and its students”, Wesleyan lost its “symbiotic intimacy with the United Methodist Church.”;Burtchaell, p. 326.;

In 1946, Ohio Wesleyan introduced a new &quot;Centennial Curriculum&quot;, which enacted seven distribution requirements across the sciences and humanities; the new requirement for a foreign language course was added to the existing humanities requirement.;Tull, p.182.; Thomson and Bashford Halls, originally men's dorms, were built between 1951 and 1954.;Tull, p.182.; In the 1960s, faculty, staff and administrators fought over administrative structure and control.;Tull, pp.182–183.; They eventually settled on a new &quot;statement of aims&quot; that stressed values, rather than religious goal statements, and instituted a more internationalized curriculum, a new Women's Studies Program, and an International Business major; the faculty senate also introduced a new academic calendar with three 10.5-week terms.;Tull, p.183;

Thomas Wenzlau's presidency (1968–1984) began with the challenge of campus unrest: Wesleyan students took over the ROTC building, demanded its shut-down, and eventually eliminated ROTC in 1970.;Murchland, p.34;;Murchland, p.74.; Students also demanded participation in departmental meetings and faculty committees, and the democratic process in the governance of Wesleyan grew in this period.;Murchland, p.35; Wenzlau's presidency witnessed decline in students' test scores, an unusually high attrition rate, lack of adequate research to identify potential major donors and a growing &quot;party school&quot; image,;Murchland, p.38–39; leading to a rocky relationship between him and the student body.;Murchland, p.39; Between 1979 and 1982, the campus newspaper ''The Transcript'' frequently criticized Wenzlau'spresidency, blaming it for &quot;severely affecting the reputation of the college&quot;.;Murchland, p.41; This exchange resulted in a ''Washington Post'' report on the school that eventually precipitated the end of Wenzlau's presidency.; Peterson, Bill. &quot;Enrollments Lower, Costs Higher&quot;. ''The Washington Post'', December 19, 1982, First Section, A5.;

=1984–today=
The Conrades-Wetherell Science Center opened in 2004.;[http://admission.owu.edu/scicent.html Conrades◊Wetherell Science Center]. Ohio Wesleyan University. Retrieved on 2007-01-08;

The new president, David Warren, increased admission standards in 1985, engaged students in a &quot;live-in&quot; presidency, expanded media exposure and established a National Colloquium focused on the liberal arts.;Murchland, p.44–45; Warren engaged in forty-one interviews on the ABC and NBC networks.;Murchland, p.45; 

More recently, Ohio Wesleyan has achieved several academic and athletic recognitions. A 1986 study, titled &quot;Educating America's Scientists: The Role of the Research Colleges,&quot; identified Ohio Wesleyan as one of 48 highly selective &quot;science-active&quot; liberal arts institutions in the nation.;[http://eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/Home.portal?_nfpb=true&amp;_pageLabel=RecordDetails&amp;ERICExtSearch_SearchValue_0=ED258532&amp;ERICExtSearch_SearchType_0=eric_accno&amp;objectId=0900000b801160bc Educating America's Scientists: The Role of the Research Colleges]. Education Resources Information Center.Retrieved on 2007-03-01.; The Battling Bishops won NCAA Division III national championships in men's basketball (1988) and men's (1998) and women's (2001, 2002) soccer.;[http://bishops.owu.edu/history.html The History of OWU Athletics]. Ohio Wesleyan University.Retrieved on 2006-12-03.;

Wesleyan continues to undertake construction projects. The new Hamilton Williams Campus Center opened in 1991. The Memorial Union Building was renovated in 2001 to accommodate the Economics Department, the Academic Resource Center, the Information Services portion of the combined Libraries and Information Services department, and the Woltemade Center for Economics, Business and Entrepreneurship. The Conrades-Wetherell Science Center opened in 2004 to provide 52,000 square feet of additional space for the science departments.;[http://www.turnerconstruction.com/columbus/content.asp?d=1083&amp;p=1064 Conrades-Wetherell Science Center at Ohio Wesleyan University]. Turner Construction.Retrieved on 2006-12-03.;As of 2007, the university is engaged in a fundraising campaign to improve athletics facilities by adding a new turf facility, a new field house and a pool, and a gateway connecting all sports facilities on campus.;[http://mrrickey.owu.edu/project.html Project Background, Remembering Mr. Rickey Campaign.]Ohio Wesleyan University.Retrieved on 2006-10-09.;

Academics
=Profile=
Ohio Wesleyan University is accredited by The Higher Learning Commission, and is a member of the Great Lakes Colleges Association,;;;; the Oberlin Group,;; and the Five Colleges of Ohio, a consortium of Ohio liberal arts colleges which also includes Kenyon College, Oberlin College, The College of Wooster, and Denison University.;;
For 2011, Wesleyan accepted approximately 52% of its regular decision applicants, 33% of its transfer applicants, and had a College admissions in the United States#Yield|yield rate of 26%.;;;;;; In 2005, the college accepted 40% of its international applicants.;; The middle 50% range of matriculating students for the class of 2010 was 1080–1320 for the SAT (old scale) and 24–28 for the ACT.;; Approximately 35% of accepted applicants were granted internal scholarships.;; Wesleyan follows a need-blind admission policy; financial circumstances are not considered when deciding whether to admit applicants.;; As of 2007, OWU's 1,850 students come from 43 states and 45 countries; 50% are from Ohio, 12% are international, and 50% are female.;; The student body is about 10% Asian, 6% Hispanic, and 9% Black. Fifty-nine percent ofWesleyan students claim no religious affiliation.;; The student-faculty ratio is 12.5:1 and faculty members teach all classes.;; Excluding independent studies and senior theses, nearly 60% of Wesleyan's class sections have fewer than twenty students enrolled.;; Wesleyan is generally known for a strong &quot;left-leaning&quot; student body and an administration with a &quot;permissive&quot; attitude. In 2007, 60% of OWU students favored the Democratic party.;Calhoon, Elisabeth. [http://web.archive.org/web/20041208185217/http://transcript.owu.edu/111004/inside3.html &quot;National youth vote lower than expected'.] ''The Transcript'' (November 10, 2004). Retrieved on 2006-08-10; and ; and ; and ; 
 
Ohio Wesleyan admits students of all cultures, lifestyles, and socio-economic backgrounds. An index examining gay-friendly policies places OWU among the nation's gay-friendly colleges,;Windmeyer, p.5–100.;;; and the university enacts policies to meet the six criteria developed by the Campus-Pride organization for recruiting and supporting students from a lesbian, gay, bi-sexual, and transgender population.;;;;* ;* ;* ;* ;* ;* ; Nearly 18% of students at Wesleyan receive Federal Pell Grants, which mostly go to students whose family incomes are below $40,000.;; This measure indicates the degree to which economically disadvantaged groups are represented at OWU.;;* ;* ;* ; As measured by percentage of Pell Grant recipients, economic diversity at OWU compares to that of Vassar College, Reed College, Colorado College and Hampshire College.;;

The faculty consists of 142 tenured members. As of 2007, all the university's tenured or tenure-track faculty members hold a PhD or other terminal degree.;; The faculty is 37% female and 63% male, with 10% from underrepresented groups. Also as of 2007, women constitute 37% of the tenured professors and earn 93.8% of what male professors earn—numbers which suggest favorable gender circumstances.;;

=Curriculum, degrees and majors=


Freshmen are paired early in their first year with academic advisors who oversee their students' academic progress.;; Upon completing 34 units of coursework, students may earn diplomas in Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Fine Arts, or Bachelor of Music.;;Wesleyan has research departments and teaching faculties in most academic disciplines; as of 2005, OWU offered 39 majors.;; OWU departments conduct all research and lectures internally. 

In its early days, OWU's curriculum began with classical studies, for the course catalogue maintained that &quot;the classical course in Greek and Latin and pure mathematics bring correctness in mental processes that an applied art, or a living and slightly inflected language, do not permit.&quot;;Hubbart, p. 88.; Scientific courses were added to Wesleyan's curriculum in 1849, and since then, scientific subjects have become a foundation to the liberal arts curriculum.;Tull, p.48.; OWU also has a highly-respected music department.;;

=Emphasis on internationalism=
Flags in University Hall of students' countries represented at Ohio Wesleyan University.
Ohio Wesleyan has upheld academic internationalism since its early years; since the 19th century, the college has established links with several international schools. In 1879, OWU alumna Elizabeth Russell founded Kwassui Women's College in Nagasaki, Japan, when predominant Japanese culture considered women's education unimportant.;; Today, Kwasuii College is one of the top finishing schools for young women in Japan.;; In 1899, William Ehnis (from the class of 1898) traveled to Africa and opened a school in Mutare, Zimbabwe, that eventually became the Africa University.;;
Main Square of Salamanca. In March 1988, Conrad Kent established the popular Salamanca Spanish Program for Wesleyan students.
The school also manifests international interest in the percentage of international students it recruits and enrolls annually. Since 1983, Ohio Wesleyan has been listed in ''U.S. News &amp; World Report'' among colleges that attract the highest percentage of international students.;;;;;;;; The percentage of international students grew in the early and mid-1990s.;Desruisseaux, Paul. Chronicle of Higher Education, 12/10/99, Vol. 46 Issue 16, pA57, 5p, Ohio Wesleyan University. ''Foreign Students Continue to Flock to the U.S.'' 1999.;; McMurtrie, Beth. &quot;Foreign Students at U.S. Institutions, 1999–2000&quot;. ''Chronicle of Higher Education'', 11/17/2000, Vol. 47 Issue 12, pA76, 1p, Ohio Wesleyan University.; In a study adjusted for school size, Wesleyan came ninth among 118 American colleges and universities in total aid awards to international students and 69th in average award per international student among both large universities and small liberal arts colleges.;; South East Asian students have significantly contributed to this growth.;; The United Nations flag, along with the flags of more than sixty represented nations and the U.S. flag, flies in University Hall in honor of the ideal of peaceful international relations.;; 

High participation in formal exchange programs constitutes a third target of the school's international focus.;Tull, p. 140.; Under a Great Lakes Colleges Association agreement, OWU established an exchange program with Waseda University in 1962 to provide approximately 30 American students with opportunities to study in Japan and 30 Japanese students to study at Wesleyan each year.;; The Salamanca program, founded by Conrad Kent in 1988,;; conducts the exchange of approximately one hundred students and faculty between OWU and the University of Salamanca in Spain. The academic collaboration frequently extends to joint participation in academic symposia: in 1993, members of the Salamanca faculty participated in a symposium on the Golden Age in Salamanca.;;

Campus


The Ohio Wesleyan campus is located adjacent to downtown Delaware, and is bisected by Sandusky Street, the main north/south street through the heart of the city. The street informally divides the campus into an eastern sector composed mainly of academic buildings and a western sector composed mainly of residential and administrative buildings. Many facilities have been constructed in the last two years, with substantial benefit to science, art, and athletic programs on campus.

=Other facilities and off-campus programs=


OWU operates several facilities outside campus: The Philadelphia Business Center, Wesleyan in Washington, The New York Arts Program for the performing, visual and media arts (a GLCA arts program), Perkins Observatory, The Strand Theatre, and the Kraus Wilderness Preserve. 

Perkins Observatory is situated in Delaware on land separate to the main campus.;; The observatory is named after Hiram Perkins, a former professor of mathematics and astronomy at the college.;; When the observatory was built in 1931, it housed the third-largest telescope in the world, which has since been moved to Arizona.;; The Perkins dome now houses a 32-inch telescope, which is the second-largest in Ohio.

The university also maintains offices for study abroad, US domestic study, and internship programs. Such programs include: Wesleyan in Washington, which allows students to study for a semester in Washington, D.C., in research and internship positions.;; The Philadelphia Center offers students hundreds of internship and field placement opportunities off-campus and the chance to live independently.;; and the New York Arts Program, which allows students of the arts to gain a semester of hands on experience in the arts in New York City. ;;
=Community relations=

The Arts Castle in Delaware, Ohio.
OWU has strong community ties with the City of Delaware.;; Students participate in Delaware's community through a variety of educational, social, and cultural programs. The student-led Columbus Initiative, founded in 1989, is an experiential learning partnership between OWU and Columbus public schools.;;More than 150 Wesleyan students from this program tutor and mentor underprivileged pupils from Columbus.;;
 
The Wesleyan Ambassadors Program (ISAP) promotes cultural diversity and ethnic awareness within the local community,;; and exposes international students to American culture through the community. The program's ambassadors visit local schools to give presentations and participate in events for local non-profit community organizations.;;

Campus organizations cooperate with local residents on issues of civic participation and activism. Progress OWU allows students from Wesleyan and local schools to express their voices on politics, public policy, and corporate and social issues, both on campus and in the local community.;;

Cultural programs also take part in community relations. In the 1960s, Wesleyan donated the Arts Castle, then part of the Fine Arts department, to the City of Delaware. It is now home to the Delaware County Cultural Arts Center. The Arts Castle hosts a variety of community programs in art, and offers classes ranging from ballet to fine arts.;; In 2004, the OWU received a donation to rehabilitate the historic Strand Theatre in downtown Delaware.;;

The university and the City of Delaware sponsor several events in town throughout the year: the Delaware Arts Festival, the Little Brown Jug, the Delaware County Fair, and the Castle Arts Affair.;; The Delaware Arts Festival is an annual event held the weekend after Mother's Day on the streets of Historic Downtown Delaware.;; The festival hosts over 170 booths featuring works of local, regional, and other artists.OWU professors chair the committees that select winners.;; The Little Brown Jug, a harness race, is run during the Delaware County Fair in September.;; The OWU president and the college mascot traditionally award the trophy for the first division of the first heat of the race.;;

Student life
=Organizations and activities=

The Hamilton Williams Campus Center is the campus hub for student activities.
Ohio Wesleyan University has 95 student clubs and organizations.;; The university offers three chapels as well as several Christian and other religious groups for its students.;;;; Its social organizations cover a wide range of interests, including chess, ultimate frisbee, finance, and medieval sword fighting.;; There are two ''a cappella'' singing groups on campus, &quot;The OWtsiders,&quot; a student-run group formed in 1999, and the all-female &quot;Pitch Black&quot; established in 2005.;; Another entertainment-related club is &quot;The Babbling Bishops&quot;, an improvisational comedy troupe.;; The &quot;Babbling Bishops&quot; started in the fall of 1990 when a group of theatre concentration students formed a performance-oriented project for their theatre degrees. The project became an improv comedy troupe, rehearsing in Stuyvesant Hall and performing with other college improv troupes since 1996.;;

Socially-conscious students can join organizations such as the activist group &quot;ProgressOWU&quot;;; or participate instudent government groups, such as the Campus Programming Board and the Wesleyan Council on Student Affairs.;The &quot;PRIDE&quot; organization offers support to OWU's LGBT students.;;

Fewer than a third of Wesleyan's students are involved in Greek life,;; but that percentage has fluctuated significantly throughout the university's history.;; All twelve fraternities and seven sororities on campus are currently involved in many philanthropic and community programs.;; 

OWU's oldest student organizations are its literary clubs, including a number of student journals, magazines, and newspapers. The school's student-run weekly newspaper, ''The Transcript'', is the oldest continuously-published, independent, college newspaper in the United States.;; ''The OWL'', an annual literary publication, features students' work and is one of the nation's oldest college literary magazines.;; Other student publications include ''The Civic Arts Review'', the electronic ''Connect2OWU'' bulletin, and ''@Wesleyan'', a quarterly online magazine.;; Radio station WSLN broadcasts from Slocum Hall and is run by students supervised by the journalism department.;;

The university also has a student government, the Wesleyan Council on Student Affairs (WCSA).

=Activism=

OWU students make a social and artistic statement on the steps of the Hamilton-Williams Campus Center.

Activism as represented in OWU's founding vision has had a significant role in Wesleyan's history.;Hubbart, p.10.;;Tull, p.132.;

The first president, Edward Thomson, staunchly supported the abolition of slavery and liberalism.;Tull, p. 132.; Other individuals associated with the university have fought racism. Branch Rickey, an alumnus, broke the racial barrier in baseball.;; Mary King, a civil rights activist,;; worked alongside Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in the U.S. civil rights movement while she was a staff member of OWU's Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC).;Anderson, p. 57.;;; In the 1980s, Wesleyan's administration, moved by student activism, pledged and eventually fully divested holdings connected to South Africa.;Vellela, p. 20–21.;;Tull, p. 142–143.;As of September 2007, Ohio Wesleyan joined a small group of liberal colleges that actively opposed the methodology and usefulness of US News and World Report college rankings, despite the fact that the magazine ranked Wesleyan among the top national liberal arts colleges.;; Wesleyan's concern intensified with disclosures about institutions flagrantly manipulating data in order to move up in the rankings in U.S. News and other popular college guides. 

OWU has partisan political groups ranging from liberal to conservative, such the College Republicans and the College Democrats, and several activism awareness groups such as ProgressOWU, Black Men of the Future, Student Union on BlackAwareness, PRIDE, ECHO, Amnesty International, and Rafiki Wa Afrika. Due to the school's proximity to Columbus, the Ohio state capital, many politically-inclined students serve internships for state representatives.;;;; In the 2000s, students have been active on the Iraq war, race, globalization, and women's reproductive rights.;;* Wood, Allison. [http://transcript.owu.edu/033105/topstory2.html &quot;Protest pleads for tolerance, diversity&quot;.] ''The Transcript'' (March 31, 2005). Retrieved on 2006-10-15.;* Blair, Kevin.[http://transcript.owu.edu/021903/opinion1.html &quot;My first protest: This is what democracy looks like&quot;.] ''The Transcript'' (February 19, 2003). Retrieved on 2003-02-13.;* Ehrlich, p. 268.;

=Traditions=

Freshmen were required to wear a red and black cap in public in the 1920s.

Many Ohio Wesleyan traditions originate from Wesleyan's early years. Monnett Weekend, beginning in 1896, welcomes female alumni, parents, and friends of Wesleyan. Events include a &quot;People's Parade&quot; with clowns, banners and marching, faculty lectures, Maypole dancing, Choral Arts Society, and an all-campus carnival.;Murchland, p.79.;;Hubbart, p. 121.; It started as a girls' athletic fête held at the Monnett Athletic Club for Mothers Day. All events were held at the Monnett Campus, where female students danced around the Maypole, while men were barred. The men, in turn, developed their own tradition: they arrived at Monnett Campus early in the morning, and concealed themselves in trees to watch the festivities, discreetly.;Tull, p.102.; 

In 1884, Ohio Wesleyan held its first ''Mock Convention'', which has recurred in every presidential election year since 1920.;; Its purpose is to inform participants, students, faculty staff, and Ohio residents about the presidential nominating convention,;; presidential United States presidential election#Ballot candidates|candidates, and key issues in the upcoming election.;; 

Beginning in the 1920s, all freshmen were required to wear &quot;dinks&quot;, red caps with black brims and a black W on the front.;Tull, p.98–99.; Disobedient students who refused to wear the &quot;dink&quot; were tossed into the ''Sulphur Spring'' (see later reference). This tradition ended in the 1950s. The freshman class of 1957 wore dinks for half the first semester. ;.;Murchland, p.64.; 

Ohio Wesleyan's Homecoming takes place in early October,;; while the Wesleyan football team plays one of its traditional rivals. New events, such as a bonfire and a five kilometer run, have been added from as recently as 2004.;; 

The ''President's Ball'', a recent gala organized by the college president, takes place on the first Saturday of December.;; Other traditions include ''OWU vs. Denison'', which stages a &quot;fierce&quot; athletic rivalry between Wesleyan and Denison University;;; the '' Sagan Colloquium'', spanning the fall semester, which consists of speeches focusing on an issue of concern; to the liberal arts;;; and ''Orchesis'', an annual celebration of modern dance and the arts, which occurs at the end of the academic year. &quot;Fresh-X&quot; is an optional program for newly admitted students that occurs just before orientation in which students may choose between hiking, backpacking and other outdoor activities to make friends with their new classmates.;;

There are two major musical events, ''Unity through Music'' and ''Springfest''. ''Unity through Music'' occurs once a year in the fall semester, and covers various musical styles in a carnival atmosphere, during the day; while, during the evening, a huge dance is held in the Hamilton-Williams Campus Center.;; Springfest, the second musical event, proceeds in mid-April and in recent years has featured well-known music groups such as Counting Crows, The Roots, Guster and, most recently, Ben Folds. It is organized by the Campus Programming Board.;;

A rock next to Smith Hall has been part of the residential campus for the last 50 years, and students continually repaint it with graffiti and slogans.;;

=Housing=
The House of Peace and Justice, a Small Living Unit on West Campus.
The university can house up to 1,600 students on campus.;; First-year students are required to live on campus during their first two semesters. A lottery system matches second to fourth-year students with dormitories and another lottery system determines how many students are allowed to live in off-campus housing. Housing options include dormitories, small living units, fraternities, and cooperative housing.;; 

Thompson, Bashford, Stuyvesant, and Smith Halls are large mid-rise dormitories on campus. Welch Hall is designated as a &quot;quiet&quot; dorm for honors students.;; Hayes Hall is an all-female dorm.;;
Image:N24101750_30197695_4010.jpg|250px|thumb|left|Students converse on the back porch of The House of Peace and Justice, a Small Living Unit on West Campus.
Approximately 200 non-freshmen students live in Small Living Units (SLUs), which are co-ops united voluntarily to meet shared economic, social, and cultural needs and aspirations in democratically controlled houses. The houses allow students to live cooperatively with one another by sharing regularly scheduled house chores, participating in the decision process, and, in some, sharing the cooking duties. Each unit houses a group of 15 students, and is organized to promote a common theme, usually indicated by the co-op's name. As of the 2006–2007 academic year, the SLUs consist of The Peace and Justice House, The International House, The House of Black Culture, The Creative Arts House, The Women's House, The Modern Foreign Languages House, The House of Thought, and The Tree House. The University owns these houses; the co-ops, therefore, must follow the University's living policies. The co-ops do, however, elect their own officers and do not have Resident Advisers or faculty in residence like other on-campus residence halls. They have a House Moderator who undergoes the same training as a Resident Advisor. At the end of each academic year, every existing and potential co-op must submit a house proposal describing its plans for theme promotion for the next academic year. The University Housing office places co-ops in houses every year on a competitive basis.;;

Off-campus housing is available only to junior and senior students; 17% of students live off-campus.;;;; Most students assert Wesleyan's policy of off-campus housing as one of the &quot;worst things&quot; about Ohio Wesleyan because of the resulting shortage of the number of lottery tickets allowing people to live off due to the off-campus lottery cap.;;

Athletics


Selby Field, home to football, lacrosse, and field hockey.

Ohio Wesleyan participates in the NCAA's Division III as a member of the North Coast Athletic Conference (NCAC). Known as the ''Battling Bishops'', Wesleyan competes in 21 sports.;; The official school colors are red and black.;;
Formal athletics at the college date to 1875, when the first football teams were organized to play against other institutions. Ohio Wesleyan joined the Ohio Athletic Conference along with Oberlin College, Kenyon College, Ohio State, and Case Western in 1902. In 1983, Wesleyan joined with nine other colleges in Ohio, Indiana and Pennsylvania to create the North Coast Athletic Conference.;; The NCAC seeks to bring together a group of liberal arts institutions that value the primacy of the academic mission over the athletic one.;Massa, Robert J. [http://www.collegenews.org/x2680.xml &quot;College Athletics: The Tail Wagging the Dog?&quot;] ''College News'' (June 24, 2003). Retrieved on 2006-06-21.;

The men's lacrosse and soccer teams are the most historically successful of the varsity teams, and lacrosse is the university's most intently-followed sport.;;;; For seven of the last twelve years, Wesleyan has won the NCAC conference All-Sports Trophy for excellence in both women's and men's sports.;; In the Sears Director's Cup standings, OWU is among the top 25 overall collegiate athletics programs in the country.;; Because of the North Coast Athletic Association athletic agreement, the university is not permitted to offer academic scholarships for athletic recruiting.;;

Ohio Wesleyan has won several NCAA Division III titles in different sports, including men's basketball (1988), men's soccer (1998), and women's soccer (2001 and 2002). The soccer team has won the NCAC championship three times, last in 2002.;; The men's baseball team has been NCAA champion eight times. The men's golf team has been NCAA champion eleven times. The women's softball team has won the championship twice, and the women's soccer team has been an NCAC champion eight times. In total, Ohio Wesleyan's varsity athletic teams have been NCAC champions 100 times, leading the teams of Denison and Kenyon.;;

The nickname ''The Battling Bishops'' dates to 1925. This is also the name of the Wesleyan's mascot, ''The Battling Bishop''. Due to its ironic name, the Wesleyan mascot has been listed as one of the weirdest college mascots.;; Due to its red robe, ''The Battling Bishop'' looks actually like a Cardinal.;; Prior to 1925, Wesleyan's teams were previously referred to as &quot;The Red and Black&quot; and &quot;The Methodists&quot;. Many schools, including several other Methodist ones, also claimed crimson and black as their colors, so the university decided to change the name.;; In 2005, attention was directed to the religious insensitivity of the historically-based name.;;
The men's lacrosse team at Selby Field.
Ohio Wesleyan maintains athletic rivalries with other NCAC institutions. The men's lacrosse team has a historic rivalry with Denison University, the soccer team with Kenyon College, and the field hockey team with Oberlin College.;; Both Denison and Wesleyan issued alerts to their fans specifically for the OWU-Denison lacrosse game about unsportsmanlike behavior and profanity.;;

In addition to the school's varsity athletics, club sports teams, including chess, hockey, cricket, rugby, ski, and scuba, have been organized as student organizations under the auspices of the Office of Student Activities. Ohio Wesleyan's intramural program includes 16 sports. Sports such as skiing, squash and Water polo#Game variations|water polo have been offered, as well as a sports trivia competition.;;

People
=Administration=



Under the charter granted by the State of Ohio, the Board of Trustees possesses the legal authority to operate the college. The charter and bylaws stipulate a board of 34 trustees, of whom one is the president. In general, it is the board that elects the president. Since Wesleyan's beginnings, sixteen people have held the title of president, and a few have served as interim president. Former presidents include lawyers, literary scholars, politicians, executives, and clergymen.;Tull, pp.26–29.; 

After several disagreements between Huddleston and the Wesleyan administration;[http://alumni.owu.edu/facultyforum/071004_RustyMcClure.html Faculty and Staff Forum]. ''Faculty and Staff Forum'' (October 20, 2007). Retrieved on 2006-06-02;, Huddleston accepted a position as president of the University of New Hampshire and left Wesleyan on June 30, 2007, giving him the second shortest presidential reign in Wesleyan's history, behind David Lockmiller, 1959–1961. On 29 May 2007, the appointment of current university provost Dr. David O. Robbins as interim president was unanimously endorsed by OWU's Board of Trustees.;[http://news.owu.edu/2007/20070529-robbins.html David O. Robbins Named Interim President of Ohio Wesleyan University]. ''Recent News Releases'' (May 29, 2007). Retrieved on 2006-06-02.; Dr. Robbins' term as Interim President began on 1 July 2007.;[http://news.owu.edu/2007/20070529-robbins.html David O. Robbins Named Interim President of Ohio Wesleyan University]. ''Recent News Releases'' (May 29, 2007). Retrieved on 2006-06-02.;

On 17 December, 2007, Dr. Rockwell &quot;Rock&quot; Jones was elected to serve as the 16th president of Ohio Wesleyan University;[http://www.owu.edu/presidentialSearch/ Ohio Wesleyan University Names Rock Jones, Ph.D., as 16th President=. ''Presidential Search'' (December 17, 2007). Retrieved on 2007-12-19.; Dr. Jones will begin his term as president in July of 2008;[http://www.owu.edu/presidentialSearch/ Ohio Wesleyan University Names Rock Jones, Ph.D., as 16th President=. ''Presidential Search'' (December 17, 2007). Retrieved on 2007-12-19.;

=Alumni=

Ohio Wesleyan alumni are active in several annual events, organizations, and initiatives. The events and associations with significant alumni involvement are Homecoming, 'W' Association, and A/PART (the alumni admission team). For the 2005–2006 fiscal year, Ohio Wesleyan's alumni giving rate was 35%.;; A number of the school's alumni have made notable contributions in the fields of government, law, academia, business, arts, journalism, and athletics, among others.

In academia, Frank Sherwood Rowland (class of 1948) won the 1995 Nobel Prize for chemistry for his research on the depletion of the Earth's ozone layer.Ezra Vogel (1950) is a prominent author on China-Japan issues and was the director of Harvard's Fairbank Center for East Asian Research from 1995 to 1999.;; William Hsiao (1963) is an economist in the field of international health at Harvard,;; and the designer of a landmark study to examine the United States' system of reimbursing physicians for medical services. Dennis R. Appleyard (1961) is the author of an international economics textbook.;;
{|style=&quot;margin: 1em auto 1em auto&quot;
;
Image:Charles Fairbanks photo portrait seated.jpg|; Charles Fairbanks ;
Image:Sherwood.JPG|;Frank Sherwood Rowland ;
Image:Nina_Van_Horn.jpg ; Wendie Malick ;
Image:Kheli.jpg|;Shirin R. Tahir-Kheli ;
Image:Rickey.jpg|;Branch Rickey ;
;
|}
In politics, Charles Fairbanks (1872) was the 26th Vice-President of the United States.;; Jo Ann Emerson (1972) serves as a U.S. Representative from Missouri,;; and was one of 50 Republicans to vote in favor of overturning President Bush's ban on federal funding for stem cell research in 2005. Arthur Flemming (1927) was a Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare, was known for his commitment to civil rights,;[http://jcgi.pathfinder.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,864320,00.html &quot;A Pro for HEW&quot;.] ''TIME'', (May 19, 1958). Retrieved on 2006-12-22.; and was the recipient of two Presidential Medals of Freedom.Lucy Webb Hayes (1853), wife of U.S. President Rutherford B. Hayes, was the first woman to be called First Lady, and the first &quot;First Lady&quot; to hold a college degree.;; 

Notable journalists and media personalities include Frank Stanton (1930), a president of CBS known for supporting broadcast journalism before Congress; Byron Pitts (1982), a national correspondent for CBS News;;; Wendie Malick (1972), an Emmy-nominated actress known for her role on the NBC sitcom ''Just Shoot Me!'';;Lewisohn, Mark. [http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/guide/articles/j/justshootme_999060905.shtml &quot;Just Shoot Me&quot;.] ''British Broadcasting Service'', (no date given). Retrieved on 2006-12-03.; Melvin Van Peebles (1953), an actor, director, screenwriter, playwright, and composer; Patricia Wettig (1974), the actress who plays vice president Caroline Richards on ''Prison Break''; and Clark Gregg (1984), the actor playing Richard in ''The New Adventures of Old Christine'' with Julia Louis-Dreyfus.;;

Numerous Ohio Wesleyan alumni have been associated with social justice. Branch Rickey (1904) was a baseball manager and executive known for signing Jackie Robinson as the first African-American in Major League Baseball.;; Another graduate, Mary King (1962), worked alongside the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. in the U.S. civil rights movement when she was a young student, and was a member of the staff of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC).;; Rev. Norman Vincent Peale (1920) was the author of ''The Power of Positive Thinking'' and the winner of a Presidential Medal of Freedom for his theological contributions.;; Others found fame in other forms: Mildred Elizabeth Sisk (aka Axis Sally) was the first American woman to be tried and sentenced for treason, convicted of broadcasting for Nazi Germany during World War II. In 1917, she majored in dramatic arts, but did not graduate due to her failure to meet all university requirements. After serving a 12-year sentence, Sisk returned to OWU, where she received a bachelor's degree in speech in 1973.;;

Footnotes


References
* Adams, I. &amp; S. Ostrander (2002). ''Ohio: A Bicentennial Portrait''. San Francisco, CA: Browntrout Publishers. ISBN 0-7631-5590-X
* Burtchaell, James (1998). ''The Dying of the Light''. Cambridge, UK: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. ISBN 0-8028-3828-6
* College Prowler (2006). ''Ohio Wesleyan University: Off the Record''. Pittsburgh, PA: College Prowler. ISBN 1-4274-0260-4
* Ehrlich, Thomas (1988). ''Civic Responsibility and Higher Education. Washington, DC: American Council on Education Oryx Press Series on Higher Education''. ISBN 1-57356-289-0
* Hubbart, Henry (1944). ''Ohio Wesleyan's First Hundred Years''. Delaware, OH: Ohio Wesleyan University. 
* Murchland, Bernard (1991). ''The History of Ohio Wesleyan University from 1942 to 1992''. Delaware, OH: Ohio Wesleyan University. ISBN 0-9630-9091-7
* Taylor, James M. (1991). ''Before Vassar Opened: A Contribution to the History of the Higher Education of Women in America''. Boston, MA: Ayer Co Pub ISBN 0-8369-6786-0
* Tull, Barbara Mitchell (1991). ''150 Years of Excellence: A Pictorial View of Ohio Wesleyan University''. Delaware, OH: Ohio Wesleyan University ISBN 0-9630909-0-9
* U. S. News &amp; World Report (2005). ''U.S. News Ultimate College Guide''. New York: Sourcebooks ISBN 1-4022-0292-X
* Vellela, Tony (1988). ''New Voices: Student Political Activism in the '80s and '90s''. Cambridge, MA: South End Press. ISBN 0-89608-341-1 
* White, E.E. (1876). ''A History of Education in the State of Ohio''. Columbus, OH: Authority of the General Assembly. ISBN 1-4255-5021-5
* Williams, W.G. (1894). ''Fifty Years of History of the Ohio Wesleyan University, Delaware, Ohio, 1844–1894''. Cleveland, OH: Cleveland Print. and Pub. Co 
* Windmeyer, S.(2006). ''The Advocate College Guide for LGBT Students''. Boston, MA: Alyson Publications, Inc. ISBN 1-55583-857-X

Further reading
*Pope, Loren. ''Colleges That Change Lives '', Penguin Group, 2000, ISBN 0-14-029616-6
*Easterbrook, Gregg. (2004). ''Who Needs Harvard?'', The Atlantic Monthly, October 2004. ;

External links

{|
| valign=&quot;top&quot; |
*[http://www.owu.edu Ohio Wesleyan University Online] - - Official website
*[http://library.owu.edu Ohio Wesleyan University Library]
*[http://admission.owu.edu/map.html Searchable Campus Map]
*[http://admission.owu.edu/finaid.html Financial Aid]
*[http://scribe.owu.edu/ Blogs at Ohio Wesleyan University]
*[http://transcript.owu.edu/ The Transcript]
*[http://bishops.owu.edu/ Athletics]
*[http://admission.owu.edu/qtvr04.html Virtual Campus Tour]
*[http://www.topozone.com/map.asp?lon=-83.0672&amp;lat=40.2964 Maps and aerial photos]
*[http://www.owualumni.com/ Ohio Wesleyan Alumni Online]
*[http://bbs.keyhole.com/ubb/download.php?Number=199411 Google Earth Campus Map]

|}









Category:Association of American Universities
Category:Delaware County, Ohio
Category:Educational institutions established in 1842
Category:Liberal arts colleges
Category:Ohio Five
Category:Ohio Wesleyan University
Category:Universities and colleges in Ohio

af:Universiteit van Wesleyan in Ohio
ar:جامعة أوهايو وسلين
bg:Охайски университет Уеслиън
ca:Universitat Wesleyan d'Ohio
cs:Wesleyan University v Ohio
da:Ohio Wesleyan University
de:Ohio Wesleyan University
el:Μεθοδιστικό πανεπιστήμιο του Οχάιο
es:Universidad Wesleyana de Ohio
eo:Universitato Wesleyan en Ohio
fr:Université wesleyenne de l'Ohio
gl:Universidade Wesleyana de Ohio
ko:웨슬리언 대학교
id:Universitas Wesleyan Ohio
is:Wesleyan-háskóli í Ohio
it:Università Wesleyana dell'Ohio
la:Wesleiana Universitas
mk:Веслијан
nl:Universiteit van Wesleyan
ja:オハイオ・ウェスリアン大学
no:Ohio Wesleyan University
pl:Uniwersytet Wesleyan
pt:Universidade de Wesleyan em Ohio
ro:Universitatea Wesleyan din Ohio
ru:Уэслианский университет Огайо
simple:Ohio Wesleyan University
fi:Wesleyanin yliopisto Ohiossa
sv:Wesleyan University i Ohio
tr:Ohio Wesleyan Üniversitesi
uk:Весліанський університет Огайо
zh:俄亥俄衛斯里昂大學