
;
|gross=$783,841,776
|imdb_id=0110357
|website=http://web.archive.org/web/20060226230020/disney.go.com/disneyvideos/animatedfilms/lionking/index.html
|music=Elton John;Hans Zimmer
|followed_by = ''The Lion King II: Simba's Pride'' (1998)
|amg_id = 1:131171
}}

''The Lion King'' is a 1994 animated feature film produced by Walt Disney Feature Animation and released by Walt Disney Pictures. It is the 32nd film in the Disney animated feature canon, and the highest-grossing traditionally animated feature film in the United States. The film focuses on a young lion in Africa named Simba, who learns of his place in the &quot;Circle of Life&quot; while struggling through various obstacles to become the rightful king. The Lion King is seen as a take on the real-life story of Sundiata Keita.

''The Lion King'' is a musical film, with songs written by composer Elton John and lyricist Tim Rice, and a film score by Hans Zimmer. The score and one of its songs won Academy Awards.;; Disney later produced two related movies: a sequel, ''The Lion King II: Simba's Pride'', and a part Sequel#Prequel|prequel/part Sequel#Midquel|midquel, ''The Lion King 1½''.

The main locations for the film, including Pride Rock and the Gorge, are modelled after Hell's Gate National Park in Kenya.;http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0110357/trivia;

Story
The story of ''The Lion King'' takes place in the fictional Pride Lands of Africa, where a lion rules over the other animals as high king. At the beginning of the film, Rafiki, a wise old mandrill shaman, blesses Simba, the newborn cub of King Mufasa and Queen Sarabi, and presents him to a massive gathering of animals at Pride Rock. Meanwhile, Mufasa's younger brother, Scar, realizes that he is no longer the heir to the throne and plots to kill Simba and Mufasa.

A few months later, Mufasa brings Simba on a tour of the Pride Lands while teaching him about the Circle of Life, the delicate balance which affects all living things, which is the king's responsibility to maintain. The tour is cut short when Mufasa's advisor, the hornbill Zazu, alerts him of poaching hyenas in the Pride Lands, and Mufasa sends a reluctant Simba home while he deals with the threat. Back at Pride Rock, Scar plants curiosity in Simba about the elephant graveyard, a place beyond the borders of the Pride Lands where Mufasa has forbidden Simba to go. Simba takes his friend, Nala, to the elephant graveyard, where the cubs are chased by Shenzi, Banzai and Ed, Scar's spotted hyena minions, only to be rescued by Mufasa.
 
Mufasa scolds Simba on the walk home, and explains to Simba that being brave dosen't mean going to look for trouble. When asked if he'll always be with him (Simba), Mufasa tells his son that the great kings of the past watch over all from the stars, just as he (Mufasa) will watch over Simba one day. Meanwhile, Scar becomes very angry as he intended for the hyenas to kill the cubs. Plotting further, Scar gathers more hyenas and buys their loyalty by claiming that if he were king they would never be without food.

left

A few days later, Scar lures Simba into a gorge for a &quot;surprise from his father,&quot; while the hyenas engineer a wildebeest stampede down into the gorge where Simba is. Alerted by an insincerely dramatic Scar, Mufasa races to rescue his son from the stampede, and after saving Simba, Mufasa is murdered by Scar, who thwarts his attempted climb to safety over an edge of a cliff. &quot;Long live the King,&quot; snarls Scar as he knocks his brother into the stampede. Scar convinces Simba that the young cub was responsible for his own father's death, and recommends that he flee the Pride Lands, never to return. To compound this, Scar sends his hyena henchmen to kill Simba, but as Simba flees through a thornbush-covered embankment, the hyenas break off pursuit and let him escape, hurling threats that he will be killed if ever seen again.Informed that both Mufasa and Simba were killed, the pride regretfully allows Scar to assume the throne as the closest of kin.

Simba collapses in a distant desert, where he is found by Timon, a meerkat, and Pumbaa, a warthog, who adopt and raise Simba under their carefree &quot;Hakuna Matata&quot; lifestyle. When Simba is grown, he is discovered by his childhood friend Nala, who relays that Scar's tyrannical reign has devastated the Pride Lands by allowing the hyenas to hunt recklessly, a problem further compounded by a severe drought, and the animal herds have been forced to move on. She demands that Simba return and take his rightful place as king, but Simba refuses, still guilty about supposedly causing his father's death. 

Simba then shows Nala around (while &quot;Can You Feel the Love Tonight&quot; is playing), and find themselves in love. But, immediately afterwards, Nala tells Simba that she doesn't understand why he won't return to Pride Rock, and the two become furious, confused, and a bit misunderstood, at each other. However, after some advice from Rafiki and the ghost of his father, Simba returns home, followed by Timon, Pumbaa and Nala.

Once back at Pride Rock, Simba confronts his uncle and the truth about Mufasa's death is revealed by an overly confident Scar. A fierce battle breaks out between the lionesses and the hyenas while Simba fights Scar solo. Lightning strikes the dry brush, and soon Pride Rock is surrounded by flames. Rafiki, Zazu, Timon and Pumbaa join the battle and fight off Shenzi, Ed and Banzai. In the midst of their fight, Scar becomes cornered and tries to surreptitiously blame everything on the hyenas, but they overhear his conversation with Simba. Simba eventually triumphs over his uncle and kicks him over a low cliff, where he is surrounded by the now resentful hyenas. The hyenas surround their traitorous fallen leader and kill him, just as everything is seemingly enveloped by the fire. 

A downpour extinguishes the brushfire, however, and Simba subsequently reconciles with his family, Rafiki directs Simba to Pride Rock's overlook with the words &quot;It is time&quot;. As Simba reaches the top of the overlook, he see the stars shining down on him and, emboldened, roars to signify that he is now king of the Pride Lands. With Simba and Nala as the new king and queen, the Pride Lands soon become green with life again, and the herds return. The movie concludes with Rafiki lifting Simba and Nala's newborn cub high into the air, thus continuing the circle of life.

Production
''The Lion King'' was originally called ''King of the Jungle'' during early stages of production.;; As in the case of the earlier film ''Bambi'', animators studied real-life animals for reference, and some of the filmmakers went to Kenya to observe the natural habitat that would be shown in the film.;''The Lion King'': Platinum Edition DVD, (2003) Disc 2, 'Production Research Trip';

The film's significant use of computers helped the filmmakers to present their vision in new ways. These include some shots of Pride Rock, tall green grass, the smoke from the fire, and the waterfall in the new version of &quot;Can You Feel the Love Tonight&quot;. The most notable use of computer animation is in the &quot;wildebeest stampede&quot; sequence. Several distinct wildebeest characters were built in a 3D computer program, multiplied into the hundreds, cel shaded to look like drawn animation, and given randomized paths down a mountainside to simulate the real, unpredictable movement of a herd. Similar multiplication occurs in the &quot;Be Prepared&quot; musical number with identical marching hyenas.;''The Lion King'': Platinum Edition DVD, (2003) Disc 2, 'Computer Animation';

''The Lion King'' was once considered a secondary project to ''Pocahontas'', both of which were in production at the same time. Most of the Disney Feature Animation staff preferred to work on ''Pocahontas'', believing it would be the more prestigious and successful of the two.;''The Lion King'': Platinum Edition DVD, (2003) Disc 2, 'Origins'; While both films were commercial and critical successes,''The Lion King'' received a greater amount of positive feedback and larger grosses than ''Pocahontas'', but both became known Disney classics.;;;;

The animation was done by SEK Studio in North Korea.

Cast

 
 
*Simba, voiced by Jonathan Taylor Thomas as a cub and Matthew Broderick as an adult, is the protagonist of the movie and the Crown Prince of the Pride Lands. His singing voice is provided by Jason Weaver as a cub and Joseph Williams as an adult. 
*Scar, voiced by Jeremy Irons, is the film's antagonist and King Mufasa's brother, who aspires to usurp the throne.
*Mufasa, voiced by James Earl Jones, is King of the Pride Lands and Simba's father.
*Timon and Pumbaa, voiced by Nathan Lane and Ernie Sabella respectively, are the comical meerkat and warthog pair who live under the philosophy of &quot;Hakuna Matata&quot; (no worries). They become Simba's provisional guardians during his exile.
*Nala, voiced by Niketa Calame as a cub and Moira Kelly as an adult, is the childhood friend and intended mate of Simba.
*Rafiki, voiced by Robert Guillaume, is a wise mandrill who presents the newborn prince of the lions.
*Zazu, voiced by Rowan Atkinson, is a loyal hornbill who serves as Mufasa's majordomo.
*Shenzi, Banzai and Ed, voiced by Whoopi Goldberg, Cheech Marin, and Jim Cummings respectively, are a trio of Hyenas who assist Scar.
*Sarabi, voiced by Madge Sinclair, is Simba's mother, princess consort to King Mufasa and is the leader of the lionesses. 
*Sarafina, voiced by Zoe Leader, is Nala's Mother.

Reaction
''The Lion King'' garnered high critical praise, gaining a 92% &quot;fresh&quot; rating at RottenTomatoes.com.;; ''Chicago Sun-Times'' film critic Roger Ebert called the film &quot;a superbly drawn animated feature&quot;,;; and ''The Washington Post'' called it &quot;an impressive, almost daunting achievement&quot;.;; The film, however, did receive its share of criticism, with Marty Mapes stating &quot;it presents an odd mix of deadly seriousness and slapstick humor.&quot;;;

=Box office performance=
;
{| class=&quot;wikitable&quot;
|-
! Source !! Gross (USD) !! % Total !! All Time Rank
|-
| Domestic
| $328,541,776 ($312,855,561 initially)
| 41.9%
| 16
|-
| Foreign
| $455,000,000
| 58.1%
| N/A
|-
| Worldwide
| $783,841,776;;
| 100.0%
| 22
|-
| Domestic Opening Weekend
| $40,888,194
| 13.1%
| 99
|-
| Domestic Adjusted (2007)
| $508,185,200
| N/A
| 24
|-
|}

''The Lion King'' became the highest grossing film of 1994 worldwide, and the second highest in the USA (the first being ''Forrest Gump'').;;The film initially made US$312,855,561 domestically, but including its 2002 IMAX re-release the domestic amount was $328,541,776. The initial gross includes the film's short return to theaters in November 1994.;;

It held the record for the most successful animated feature film in history until that record was broken by the computer animated ''Finding Nemo'' in 2003. Still, it remains the most successful non-computer-generated imagery|CGI animated feature. When adjusted for inflation, it is the fourth top-grossing animated film (below ''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs'', ''One Hundred and One Dalmatians'' and ''Fantasia'').

=Awards=
The film won two Academy Awards: Best Original Score and Best Original Song (&quot;Can You Feel the Love Tonight&quot;). Besides winning in the same two categories in the Golden Globe Awards, it also won Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture - Musical or Comedy|Best Motion Picture - Musical or Comedy, and another Golden Globe for film editing. In the Annie Awards, it won Best Animated Film, Best Individual Achievement for Story Contribution in the Field of Animation, and Jeremy Irons also won Best Achievement for Voice Acting for voicing Scar.;;

Music
Elton John and Tim Rice wrote five original songs for this film, with Elton John performing &quot;Can You Feel the Love Tonight&quot; during the end credits. Hans Zimmer also contributed to the film a score supplemented with traditional African music and choir elements arranged by Lebo M.;''The Lion King'': Platinum Edition DVD, (2003) Disc 2, 'Music: African Influence';The film won Best Original Score and Best Original Song (&quot;Can You Feel the Love Tonight&quot;) in both the Academy Awards and Golden Globe Awards.;; Three songs from the film were nominated simultaneously for the Best Original Song Academy Award (&quot;Can You Feel the Love Tonight&quot;, &quot;Circle of Life&quot; and &quot;Hakuna Matata&quot;), with &quot;Circle of Life&quot; also being nominated simultaneously in the same category at the Golden Globe Awards.;;

=Songs=
These are the musical numbers of the film, listed in order of appearance.

*&quot;Circle of Life&quot; is sung by an off-screenCarmen Twillie, with African vocals by Lebo M and his African choir. This song is played during the ceremony where a newborn Simba is presented to the animals of the Pride Lands.The song is reprised at the end of the film.
*&quot;The Morning Report&quot;, a song originally not in the film (it was created for the live musical version), was added with an accompanying animated sequence in the 2003 Platinum Edition home video re-release.Sung by Zazu (Jeff Bennett), Mufasa (James Earl Jones) and young Simba (Evan Saucedo), the song is an extension of the scene in the original film where Zazu delivers a morning report to Mufasa, and later gets pounced on by Simba. 
*&quot;I Just Can't Wait to Be King&quot; is sung by young Simba (Jason Weaver), young Nala (Laura Williams), and Zazu (Rowan Atkinson). Simba uses this musical number in the film to distract Zazu so that he and Nala can sneak off to the elephant graveyard, while expressing his wish to be king as soon as possible.
*&quot;Be Prepared&quot; is sung by Scar (Jeremy Irons/Jim Cummings), Shenzi, Banzai and Ed#Shenzi|Shenzi (Whoopi Goldberg), Shenzi, Banzai and Ed#Banzai|Banzai (Cheech Marin) and Shenzi, Banzai and Ed#Ed|Ed (Jim Cummings). In this song, Scar reveals to his hyena minions his plot to kill Mufasa and Simba.
*&quot;Hakuna Matata&quot; is sung by Timon (Nathan Lane), Pumbaa (Ernie Sabella) and Simba (Jason Weaver as a cub and Joseph Williams as an adult). Timon and Pumbaa use this song as a warm welcome to Simba as he arrives at their jungle home, and to symbolize their &quot;no worries&quot; lifestyle. Simba grows into a young adult by the end of the song.
*&quot;Can You Feel the Love Tonight&quot; is a love song sung mainly by an off-screen Kristle Edwards, with Timon (Nathan Lane), Pumbaa (Ernie Sabella), adult Simba (Joseph Williams) and adult Nala (Sally Dworsky). This musical sequence shows Timon and Pumbaa's frustration at Simba falling in love, and the development of Simba and Nala's romantic relationship. The song won the Oscar for Best Original Song during the 67th Academy Awards.
*&quot;Circle of Life (reprise)&quot; is reprised at the end of the movie by Lebo M and his African choir for the presentation of Simba and Nala's newborn cub.

On Classic Disney: 60 Years of Musical Magic, this includes ''Circle of Life'', ''Hakuna Matata'', and ''I Just Can't Wait to Be King'' on the Classic Disney: 60 Years of Musical Magic#Disc one|red disc, ''Can You Feel the Love Tonight'' on the Classic Disney: 60 Years of Musical Magic#Disc two|blue disc, and ''Be Prepared'' on the Classic Disney: 60 Years of Musical Magic#Disc three|green disc.
And on Disney's Greatest Hits, this also includes ''Circle of Life'' on the Disney's Greatest Hits#Volume 1|blue disc, ''Hakuna Matata'' on the Disney's Greatest Hits#Volume 2|green disc, and ''Can You Feel the Love Tonight'' on the Disney's Greatest Hits#Volume 3|red disc.

= Soundtrack and other albums=


The film's original motion picture soundtrack was released on July 13, 1994.

On February 28 1995, Disney released an album entitled ''Rhythm of the Pride Lands'', a sequel of sorts to the original soundtrack which featured songs and performances inspired by, but not featured in, the film.Most of the tracks were composed by African composer Lebo M and focused primarily on the African influences of the film's original music, with most songs being sung either partially or entirely in various African languages. Several songs featured in the album would later have incarnations in other ''The Lion King''-oriented projects, such as the stage musical or the direct-to-video sequels (examples being &quot;He Lives In You&quot; used as the opening song for ''The Lion King II: Simba's Pride''; and a reincarnation of &quot;Warthog Rhapsody&quot;, called &quot;That's All I Need&quot;, in ''The Lion King 1½''). ''Rhythm of the Pride Lands'' was initially printed in a very limited quantity. However, it was re-released in 2003 and included in some international versions of ''The Lion Kings special edition soundtrack with an additional track.
It's been circulating from hand to hand for a while now, but now it's been posted on an official page at Hans-Zimmer.com that a long-lost &quot;Lion King Expanded Score&quot; has appeared on several download sites and is achieving broad acknowledgment among fans of Zimmer's music and TLK alike.

This score contains 21 tracks, 16 of which consist of never-before-released instrumental music from Hans Zimmer's original masterpiece score. The linked site contains track information and a message discussion board, where more information can be obtained on how to find a copy of the score.

The Expanded Score was available for purchase on eBay.

Sequels and spin-offs
The success of the film led to several spin-offs, its first being a 70mm film released in 1995 entitled ''Circle of Life: An Environmental Fable''. It promoted environmental friendliness and was shown in the Harvest Theater in The Land Pavilion at Epcot in Walt Disney World. Also debuted in 1995 was a spin-off television series called ''Timon &amp; Pumbaa (TV series)|The Lion King's Timon and Pumbaa'' which focused on the titular meerkat and warthog duo in a more modern, human world to the film's.

In addition, a direct-to-video sequel called ''The Lion King 2: Simba's Pride'' was released in 1998, focusing on Simba's daughter Kiara. Finally, a direct-to-video prequel/midquel, ''The Lion King 1½'' (also known as ''The Lion King 3: Hakuna Matata''), was released in 2004, showing the timeline of ''The Lion King'' from the perspective of Timon and Pumbaa.

In 2008, on Playhouse Disney, Timon and Pumbaa are going to star in an educational computer-animated program called ''Timon and Pumbaa: The Wilds''.

Home video and DVD release
''The Lion King'' was first released on VHS and laserdisc in the United States on March 3 1995, under Disney's &quot;Masterpiece Collection&quot; video series. The VHS tape quickly became one of the best-selling videotapes of all time: 4.5 million tapes were sold on the first day.;; In addition, Deluxe Editions of both formats were released. The VHS Deluxe Edition included the film, an exclusive lithograph of Rafiki and Simba (in some editions), a commemorative &quot;Circle of Life&quot; epigraph, six concept art lithographs, another tape with the half-hour TV show ''The Making of The Lion King'', and a certificate of authenticity. The CAV laserdisc Deluxe Edition also contained the film, six concept art lithographs and ''The Making of The Lion King'', but also included storyboards, character design artwork, concept art, rough animation, and a directors' commentary that the VHS edition did not have, on a total of four double sided disks. These home video versions of ''The Lion King'' all went into moratorium in 1997.;;

On October 7 2003, the film was re-released on VHS and released on DVD for the first time as ''The Lion King: Platinum Edition'', as part of Disney's Platinum Edition line of animated classic DVDs. The DVD release featured a remastered version of the film created for the 2002 IMAX release and a second disc with bonus features. The film's soundtrack was available in its original Dolby 5.1 track or in a new Disney Enhanced Home Theater Mix. The DVD was the first of Disney DVDs to include the Disney Enhanced Home Theater Mix.;; By means of seamless branching, the film could be viewed either with or without a newly-created scene — a short conversation in the film replaced with a complete song, &quot;The Morning Report&quot;. A Special Collector's Gift Set was also released, with the DVD set, five exclusive lithographed character portraits (new sketches created and signed by the original character animators), and an introductory book entitled ''The Journey''.;; More than two million copies of the Platinum Edition DVD and VHS units were sold on the first day of release.;; A DVD boxed set of the three ''The Lion King'' films (in two-disc Special Edition formats) was released on December 6 2004. In January 2005, the film went back into moratorium.;;

The Platinum Edition of ''The Lion King'' was criticized by fans mainly for its false advertising: producer Don Hahn had earlier stated that the film would be in its original 1994 theatrical version, but it was confirmed after release that it was the &quot;digitally enhanced&quot; IMAX version instead, which is slightly different than the original theatrical cut. One of the most noticeable differences features re-drawn crocodiles in the &quot;I Just Can't Wait to Be King&quot; scene.;;

Controversies
=Story origin=
Comparison of ''Kimba the White Lion'' (left) and ''The Lion King'' (right).

''The Lion King'' was originally advertised as being the first animated Disney film not based on an already-existing story. However, elements of the film bear a resemblance to a famous 1960s Japanese anime television show, ''Kimba the White Lion''.;;One similarity between the two is that the protagonists' names (Kimba and Simba) are very alike. Other coincidences include that most characters in ''Kimba'' have an analogue in ''The Lion King'' and that various individual scenes are nearly identical in composition and camera angle. Early production artwork on the Lion King Platinum Edition DVD even depicts a white lion.; 'Presentation Reel' extra on the Lion King Platinum Edition DVD; Disney's official stance is that any resemblance is coincidental, and directors Roger Allers and Rob Minkoff stated that they were well into the development process before the ''Kimba'' similarity was identified. Despite the resemblances between the film and the series, the family of Osamu Tezuka, ''Kimbas creator, has not filed a lawsuit. 

The character designs and scenes are the only things that have been speculated to be taken from Kimba, the story from the anime and the Lion King story are quite different. The filmmakers, however, admitted that the story of ''The Lion King'' was inspired by the 1942 Disney animated film ''Bambi'', the Joseph and Moses stories from the Bible, and William Shakespeare's ''Hamlet''.;; Christopher Vogler, in his book ''The Writer's Journey: Mythic Structure For Writers'', described Disney's request that he suggest how to improve the plot of ''The Lion King'' by incorporating ideas from ''Hamlet''.;; 

The plot is noted as sharing some striking elements with the West African Epic of Sundiata.;[http://eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/custom/portlets/recordDetails/detailmini.jsp?_nfpb=true&amp;_&amp;ERICExtSearch_SearchValue_0=ED386732&amp;ERICExtSearch_SearchType_0=eric_accno&amp;accno=ED386732 The True Lion King of Africa: The Epic History of Sundiata, King of Old Mali.];

=Alleged subliminal message=
The supposed &quot;SEX&quot; frame
In one scene of the film's original VHS and LaserDisc releases, it appears that the word &quot;SEX&quot; was embedded into the dust flying in the sky when Simba flops down.
;; which conservative activist Donald Wildmon asserted was a subliminal message intended to promote sexual promiscuity. However, the films' animators have stated that the letters spell &quot;SFX&quot; (a common abbreviation of &quot;special effects&quot;), and was a sort of innocent &quot;signature&quot; signed by the effects animation team to the work they did. Because of the controversy it caused, the image has been edited out of the 2003 DVD and VHS editions.

=&quot;The Lion Sleeps Tonight&quot;=
The use of the song &quot;The Lion Sleeps Tonight&quot; in a scene with Timon and Pumbaa has led to disputes between Disney and the family of South African Solomon Linda, who composed the song (originally titled &quot;Mbube&quot;) in 1939. In July 2004, the family filed suit, seeking $1.6 million in royalties from Disney. In February 2006, Linda's heirs reached a legal settlement with Abilene Music, who held the worldwide rights and had licensed the song to Disney for an undisclosed amount of money.;;

=Alleged racism=
Upon its release, some critics complained that the hyenas in the film depicted negative racial stereotypes of urban blacks and Hispanics ;http://www.slantmagazine.com/film/film_review.asp?ID=832;. It has been argued the &quot;despicable hyena storm troopers speak...in racially coded accents that take on the nuances of the discourse of a decidedly urban, black and Latino youth&quot; ;http://www.gseis.ucla.edu/courses/ed253a/Giroux/Giroux2.html;.

=Hamas' propaganda=
In August 2007, the Hamas militant organization produced an animated propaganda film that allegedly mimicked the style of ''The Lion King''. The program was aired via their television station, ''Al-Aqsa TV''. Hamas was portrayed as a lion that chased and killed rats that bared the likenesses of members of the secular Fatah organization in Gaza. The program was brieflyaired but was pulled off the air for revision.;;;;

Impact on popular culture
Mufasa's cameo in the 'Round Springfield episode of ''The Simpsons''
Because of its popularity, ''The Lion King'' has been referenced in various media. For instance, the animated TV series ''The Simpsons'' spoofed the film in the episode, &quot;'Round Springfield&quot;. Towards the end of the episode, the ghost of Mufasa appears in the clouds with Bleeding Gums Murphy, Darth Vader and James Earl Jones (who actually voiced both Mufasa and Darth Vader in their respective movie appearances), saying: &quot;You must avenge my death, Kimba... dah, I mean Simba,&quot; a reference to the ''Lion King''/''Kimba the White Lion'' controversy.;; The scene is concluded with &quot;this is CNN&quot; (also voiced by James Earl Jones). A similar parody scene appeared in the film ''Kung Pow! Enter the Fist''. 

Disney has also referenced ''The Lion King'' in its own films. In the Disney-released, Pixar-produced 1995 computer animated film ''Toy Story'', the song &quot;Hakuna Matata&quot; can be heard playing in List of Toy Story characters#Andy Davis|Andy's car during the film's climax. Coincidentally, Tim Allen, who voiced Buzz Lightyear was in Home Improvement with Jonathan Taylor Thomas, who voiced Cub Simba ;;

In one scene in Episode 166 of Home Improvement, Tim Allen is seen playing with a stuffed Cub Simba toy.He says &quot;Well, I've never played a lion before,&quot; just as Jonathan Taylor Thomas comes on screen and replies, &quot;I have and it's a tough gig. Everybody expects you to be king.&quot;

Pumbaa made brief appearances in ''The Hunchback of Notre Dame'';; and ''Aladdin and the King of Thieves'',;; both released in 1996. 

The 1997 animated film ''Hercules'' paid homage to both ''The Lion King'' and the Nemean Lion: Scar's skin is worn by Hercules while he is posing for a painting on a Greek vase.;;

A frog species, ''Philautus simba'', first found in Sinharaja Forest Reserve, Sri Lanka, was named in reference to The Lion King's protagonist.It is interesting to note that &quot;Sinharaja&quot; means &quot;Lion King&quot; or &quot;Royal Lion&quot; in the local Sinhalese language, though this is not a result of the movie in any way. 

The 2000 ''South Park'' episode &quot;A Very Crappy Christmas&quot; features a spoof of &quot;The Circle of Life&quot; called &quot;The Circle of Poo,&quot; wherein Mr. Hankey, literally a talking piece of excrement, shows his son Cornwallis his place in the food chain. The musical number ends with Mr. Hankey holding Cornwallis in the air just as Rafiki holds Simba.

Video games
Two video games based on the film have been released. The first, entitled, ''The Lion King'', was published in 1994 by Virgin and was released on NES, SNES, Game Boy, Sega Master System, Sega Genesis, Game Gear, PC and Amiga. The NES version, however, was only released in Europe, and was not identical to the SNES version. The second game, entitled ''The Lion King: Simba's Mighty Adventure'', was published in 2000 by Activision and was released on PlayStation and Game Boy Color.

In 1996, Disney Interactive and 7th Level released ''Timon &amp; Pumbaa's Jungle Games'' for the PC. It was later seen on the SNES. Games include one where Pumbaa uses his gas to destroy fruits and bugs (and even a kitchen sink) that fall out of trees, a variation on a pinball game, a game where you use a peashooter to hit enemy creatures in the jungle, a game where Timon has to jump onto hippos over a river to deliver bugs to Pumbaa, and a variation on ''Tetris''.

A third game was published in 2004 simply called ''The Lion King'' for Game Boy Advance in Europe and Asia, but was in fact a game based on the direct-to-video prequel/midquel ''The Lion King 1½'' with Timon and Pumbaa as the playable characters.

Part of the main plot of ''The Lion King'' is retold in the 2005 Square Enix PlayStation 2 game ''Kingdom Hearts II''. The characters of the film appear in &quot;Pride Land&quot;, one of the many Disney &quot;worlds&quot; in the game. The plot is altered and new dialogue was recorded to accommodate the presence of the three main protagonists (Sora, Donald Duck and Goofy). Simba also appears as a Summon and Summon Card in ''Kingdom Hearts'' and ''Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories'', respectively.

See also
*''The Lion King: Six New Adventures'', a boxed set of books released after the film's success. The books provide some backstory for the film (such as how Scar received his scar) and chronicle events that take place between the film and ''The Lion King II: Simba's Pride|Simba's Pride''.
*''The Lion King: The Brightest Star'', a book and cassette tape set telling the story of Simba's great-grandfather Mohatu.
*''The Lion King: Friends In Need'', a children's book that provides backstory on the characters Mufasa, Sarabi, and Zazu
*''Kingdom Hearts II'', a video game that features ''The Lion King'' as one of its worlds.

References


External links

* 
* 









Category:1994 films
Category:Best Song Academy Award winners
Category:Annie Award winners
Category:Adventure films
Category:Coming-of-age films
Category:Disney animated features canon
Category:English-language films
Category:Films about animals
Category:Films featuring anthropomorphic characters
Category:Musical films
Category:Children's fantasy films
Category:Shakespeare on film
Category:Swahili-language films
Category:The Lion King films
Category:Xhosa-language films
Category:Zulu-language films

ar:الأسد الملك
cs:Lví král
da:Løvernes Konge
de:Der König der Löwen
dv:ދަ ލަޔަން ކިންގ
es:El rey león
fa:شیرشاه
fr:Le Roi Lion
hr:Kralj lavova
id:The Lion King
is:Konungur ljónanna
it:Il Re Leone
he:מלך האריות
la:Rex Leo
hu:Az Oroszlánkirály
nl:De Leeuwenkoning
ja:ライオン・キング
no:Løvenes konge
pl:Król Lew
pt:The Lion King
ru:Король-лев
sh:Kralj lavova
fi:Leijonakuningas
sv:Lejonkungen
vi:Vua sư tử
zh:狮子王