;;Latin: &quot;To Serve&quot;;
|tagline = ''Tomorrow starts here.''
|established = March 8, 1907
|type = Public university,;Sea Grant University
|chancellor = Steven Ballard|
|endowment= US $121 million;;
|city = Greenville
|state = North Carolina
|country = USA
|students = 24,351;;
|undergrad = 18,587
|postgrad = 5,764
|medical students 290
|staff = 5,078
|faculty = 1,700;;
|campus = Urban, 
|nickname = Pirates&amp;nbsp;&amp;nbsp; 
|mascot = ECU Pirates#Why The Pirates|PeeDee the Pirate 
|colors = Old Gold and Royal Purple 
|athletics= NCAA Division I, Conference USA, 19 varsity teams
|website= [http://www.ecu.edu/ www.ecu.edu]
}}

East Carolina University is a public, coeducational, intensive research university located in Greenville, North Carolina, United States. Named East Carolina University by statue and commonly known as ECU or East Carolina, the university is the largest institution of higher learning in eastern North Carolina and the third-largest university in North Carolina. With an enrollment of 25,990 students, it is the fastest-growing campus in the UNC system.;; 

The North Carolina General Assembly founded ECU on March 8, 1907 as a teacher training school and selected Greenville as its seat on July 2, 1908 with the first classes beginning in 1909.While East Carolina has historical strengths in education, nursing, business, music, theater, and medicine, it offers over 100 Bachelor degree areas of study including mathematics, hospitality management, engineering, construction management, computer science, exercise physiology, political science, and social work.;;

East Carolina's name changed from East Carolina Teachers Training School (ECTTS) in 1907 to East Carolina Teachers College (ECTC), then East Carolina College (ECC), and finally, in 1967, to East Carolina University (ECU).;The change in its name reflects the changed mission.Originally the school was established to train teachers for North Carolina, specifically the eastern part of the state.Today, ECU continues to serve eastern North Carolina in a larger capacity.The medical school brings much needed medical care to the impoverished area.;;. In early August 2007, it was announced that the North Carolina General Assembly had approved and Governor Mike Easley had signed the budget including $25 Million for a new School of Dentistry at ECU with the first students expected no later than 2011. The Small Business Institute, through the College of Business, offers assistance and advice to small business owners.;East Carolina has grown from 43 acres in 1907 to almosttoday.;;The university today is located on four properties: main, hospital/health science, west research facility, and the Mattamuskeet field station.;;;The seven undergraduate colleges, two undergraduate schools, graduate school, and one professional school are all located on these four properties.;;The majority of the non-allied health majors are located on the main campus.The School of Nursing, Brody School of Medicine, and some of the Allied Health majors are located on the hospital/health science campus.The students have an active social life.There are nine social sororities and 16 social fraternities.;; Also four historically black sororities, five historically black fraternities, one Native American fraternity, and one Native American sorority make up the Greek life.;Along with Greek life, there are over 300 registered clubs on campus.;

History

Father of East Carolina University, Thomas Jordan (T.J.) Jarvis
Public Laws of North Carolina, 1907, Chapter 820 titled ''An Act to Stimulate High School Instruction in the Public Schools of the State and Teacher Training'' was the official law chartering East Carolina Teachers Training School (ECTTS) on March 8, 1907 by the North Carolina General Assembly.;; The chairman of its original Board of Trustees, Thomas Jordan (T.J.) Jarvis, a former Governor of North Carolina now known as the &quot;Father of ECU&quot;, participated in groundbreaking ceremonies for the first buildings on July 2, 1908 in Greenville, North Carolina and ECTTS opened its doors on October 5, 1909.;;;; Although its purpose was to train &quot;young white men and women&quot;, there were no male graduates until 1932.;; In 1920, ECTTS became a four-year institution and was renamed East Carolina Teachers College (ECTC); its first bachelor's degrees were awarded the following year in education.; A master's degree program was authorized in 1929; the first such degree granted by ECTC was in 1933.; Progress toward full college status was made in 1948 with the designation of the bachelor of arts as a liberal arts degree, and the bachelor of science as a teaching degree.;; A change of name to East Carolina College in 1951 reflected this expanded mission.; Over the objections of Dan K. Moore|Governor Dan K. Moore, who opposed the creation of a university system separate from the Consolidated University of North Carolina, ECC was made a regional university effective July 1, 1967, and assumed its present name, East Carolina University. It did not, however, remain independent for long; on July 1, 1972, it was incorporated into the University of North Carolina System, the successor to the Consolidated University.; Today, ECU is the third-largest university in North Carolina with 18,587 undergraduates and 5,764 graduates, including the 290 Brody School of Medicine students. 

= Future of East Carolina=
Pirate Statue at Dowdy-Ficklen Stadium. Dedicated on October 23, 1999 by Irwin Belk.
Dental School;
At the February 24, 2006 Board of Trustees meeting, the members unanimously passed a resolution to start a dental school.;; The dental school has also been unanimously approved by the UNC System Board of Governors.;;;;;; While the dental school found opposition from many practicing dentists, with half the members of the North Carolina Dental Society opposing the move for fear of too much competition and a possible oversupply of dentists the General Assembly of North Carolina and the Governor, noting the ECU Medical School's contribution to the citizens of North Carolina, funded this latest addition to East Carolina University.;; In early August 2007, it was announced that the North Carolina General Assembly had approved and Governor Mike Easley had signed the budget including $25 Million for the School of Dentistry (out of the total cost of $87 million) at ECU with the first students expected no later than 2011.;;

Dowdy-Ficklen Stadium Expansion;
Dowdy-Ficklen Stadium is in the beginning process of expansion.Depending on the July Board of Trustees Meeting, the stadium will become horseshoed in, connecting the north and south side.Also at Dowdy-Ficklen, on the south side, a new press box and office complex will be built.The total height will be about six stories, with a two-story press box covering the south side. 

North Campus Recreation Complex;
North Recreation Complex is an athletic complex located on aparcel of land north of East Carolina University’s main campus.It will augment the Blount Intramural Sports Fields located behind the Carol Belk Building on Charles Boulevard.The first of three phases of the complex will be completed in 2007.Phase one includes eight lighted fields, a golf course, a 5.6 acre (23,000 m²) lake with a beach, sunbathing area, and a field house. The complex is located near the intersection of the NC 33 and US 264.;;;;

Campus
East Carolina is separated into three distinct campuses: Main Campus, Health Sciences Campus, and West Research Campus.It has three libraries: J.Y. Joyner Library, The Music Library, and Laupus Library.ECU owns a field station in New Holland, NC.

The Cupola at ECU sits in the Mall. It is a replica of the original that sat atop the Old Administrative Building.

= Main=
The main campus is about 520&amp;nbsp;acres (2.1&amp;nbsp;km²) in an urban residential area of downtown Greenville.The 162 buildings on main campus comprise more than 4.7 million square feet (325,000&amp;nbsp;m²) of academic, research, and residential space.;; Many of the Main Campus buildings feature the Spanish-Mission style architecture; inspiration drawn from Thomas Jarvis' time as an ambassador to Brazil.;;;; He wanted to bring the unique architecture to Eastern North Carolina. On the main campus, there are 15 residence halls which are divided into three separate neighborhoods.;; The distinct feature of the main campus is the mall, which is a large tree-laden grassy area where many students go to relax. In the middle of the mall is the replica of the cupola on the old Austin (original Administrative and Classroom) building.

= Health Sciences Campus/Pitt County Memorial Hospital=
The Health Sciences campus is situated at Pitt County Memorial Hospital (PCMH).PCMH, a 745-bed flagship Level I Trauma Center facility in Greenville, serves as an academic medical center for the Brody School of Medicine.;; The University Health System also operates six additional hospitals and has affiliation agreements with six hospitals serving all of eastern North Carolina.;; The area is aboutwest of Main Campus onwith nearlyof academic and research space in 39 buildings.;; Other buildings besides PCMH include the Brody School of Medicine, the East Carolina Heart Institute (under construction), Leo Jenkins Cancer Center, and the Allied Health &quot;Learning Village&quot; composed of the School of Nursing, Laupus Medical Library and School of Allied Health Sciences.;;;;;;

=West Research=
West Research Campus lies approximately four&amp;nbsp;miles west of the Health Sciences Campus. It consists of abuilding on the former Voice of America site;; and large areas of biology, botany and other sciences field study sites. It is also the home of the North Carolina Institute for Health and Safety in Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries with an administrative and several support buildings.;;

=Libraries=
Joyner Library clock tower
Sonic Plaza and J.Y. Joyner Library
J.Y. Joyner Library is located on the main campus and holds nearly 1.3 million bound volumes, 2.5 million pieces of microform, 532,000 government documents, more than 24,000 journal subscriptions.;; Joyner Library is located beside the ECU Mall. The Music Library is a branch of Joyner housing almost 78,000 items. It is located on the first floor of A.J. Fletcher Music Center.;; Lastly, there is the Laupus Library. It holds 158,457 volumes (print and non-print) and 8,712 current print, non-print, and electronic serial titles.;;

=Mattamuskeet field station=
The field station is located in New Holland, North Carolina. The area serves as a field station for the coastal studies, coastal resource management, and biology programs.;; The main goal of the field station is economic development into the region through both environmental education and eco-tourism.;; It also serves as a facility for small retreats and as a base for research on coastal issues.;; 
It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1980.;; It is adjacent to theMattamuskeet Wildlife Refuge.

Colleges and schools
ECU is home to seven undergraduate colleges, two undergraduate schools, graduate school, and one professional school. The oldest school is the modern day College of Education. The university is ranked one of the &quot;Best Value Colleges&quot; by The Princeton Review in 2008.;; 
Flanagan Building was built in 1939. It was funded by state and Public Works Administration funds. This was the only project on campus funded by PWA funds. The building is named for Edward Gaskill Flanagan, an ECTC Board of Trustees member and Greenville native.;;

The liberal arts college at East Carolina University is the Thomas Harriot College of Arts and Sciences.;; It consists of 16 departments, making it the fourth largest school at East Carolina University, after the College of Education, the College of Technology and Computer Science, and the College of Fine Arts and Communication.;; The liberal arts college has its roots in the beginning of the University.;;The masters graduate degree in Psychology, Human Services is ranked # 2 by GetEducated.com.;;

The College of Business consists of five undergraduate majors with concentrations in each, plus a Master of Business Administration and Master of Science in Accounting program. The College beginnings came in 1936 when the Department of Commerce was organized. It later changed to the Department of Business Education, and then to the Department of Business. Finally, in 1960, the School of Business was formed.;; The college undergraduate programs was accredited in 1967, and the graduate programs was accredited in 1976 by The Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business.;; The college is a governing school of the Graduate Management Admission Council.;; GetEducated.com ranked the MBA program #1 in the ''Best Buys Online MBA, AACSB, 2006'' category and # 1 in the ''Best Online Bachelor Degree – Business and Management, 2006''.;;;;The college runs a Small Business Institute to advise small business owners on how to succeed.;; 

The College of Education is the oldest college at ECU. It houses and administers all of the education majors. There are 14 undergraduate majors in the College. ECU’s College of Education prepares more professionals for North Carolina schools than any other university in the state. The College scored higher than other North Carolina universities when the state board evaluated teacher education programs last year. In addition, the Institution of Higher Education Performance Report showed ECU was first in the number of graduates who were employed in public schools across the state.&quot;;; The college is considered one of the exemplary professional preparation programs according to the North CarolinaState Board of Education’s Higher Education Performance Report. College of Education.;; 

The College of Fine Arts and Communication comprises four schools that range from dance to design and broadcast journalism. The college officially opened on July 1, 2003, but can trace its roots to ECU founding; the school hired art and music professionals in 1907 to train teachers.;;

The College of Health and Human Performance is made up of three departments and handles all of the recreational and exercise degrees at East Carolina University. It took on its name in 2003, but traces its legacy to the Department of Physical Education in 1930. It was the 1930 East Carolina Teachers College Planning Document number two priority. In 1938, the Department of Physical Education was established and PE became a specialty area for high school teachers.;;

The College of Human Ecology houses four departments and one school along with two institutes. It was first incorporated in 1968 and started to admit students in 1971.;; &quot;''The Carolyn Freeze Baynes Institute for Social Justice'' is an international forum for addressing questions, presenting ideas, and developing innovations. The Institute's focus in these activities is the identification of injustices and development of more just alternatives through systematic professional research, scholarship, and public presentation of findings and ideas.&quot;;;GetEducated.com puts East Carolina’s online master's degree program in criminal justice and legal studies #2 in the country.;;

The College of Technology and Computer Science comprises three departments. The college now offers a BS in Engineering.;;The college offers seven other degrees along with engineering. ;;GetEducated.com ranks ECU as #1 in the country for affordable Computer Science and Information graduate degrees.;;

The School of Allied Health Sciences encompasses the other health science majors. The school offers over 15 majors.All of the health sciences majors are located in the Allied Health Sciences building which is in the West Campus beside the Brody School of Medicine. It was established in the 1967-68 school year.;;

The College of Nursing comprises one undergraduate major, Nursing. The school was created in 1959 and now offers Bachelor of Science, Masters, and PhD program. The 100+ faculty teaches the students everything about the nursing field while practicing in the under served Eastern North Carolina.;; On October 12, 2007, the University of North Carolina Board of Governors permitted the re-designation of the School of Nursing to the College of Nursing. ;;

The Graduate School consist of 69 masters degree, 41 certificate, and 18 doctoral programs.It coordinates the graduate offerings of all departments in the seven colleges and two schools.The School also runs the non-professional degree programs of the professional School of Medicine.;;;;;;The Brody School of Medicine was envisioned in the early 1960s by a group of civic leaders in Eastern North Carolina looking for a way to provide more modern medical care in the East. The School was finally established in 1974. The mission of the school set by the legislators is: &quot;to increase the supply of primary care physicians to serve the state, to improve health status of citizens in eastern North Carolina, and to enhance the access of minority and disadvantaged students to a medical education.&quot;;; One hundred percent of the 290 current students; (to be expanded to 325 with the Fall Class of 2007;;) are North Carolina citizens. The it is the only school in the state that only accepts North Carolina residents.;; The school is ranked number nine in the country for primary care by U.S.News &amp; World Report.;;

Student life
=Greek life=


There are nine social sororities at the East Carolina Campus,;; all of which own a house located at or near 5th or 10th Street. There are currently 16 social fraternities at East Carolina.;; The majority are located off or near 5th Street or 10th Street. Of the 16 social fraternities, seven currently do not own a house.Greek life started in 1958 with the introduction of four social fraternities: Kappa Alpha Order, Lambda Chi Alpha, Pi Kappa Alpha, and Theta Chi.Two years later, eight of the nine social sororities were founded. 

National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) has a presence on campus, as well. There are four historically black sororities and five historically black fraternities.;;There are over 18 honor and 13 service or religious fraternities or sororities at ECU.

=Athletics=
East Carolina Pirates logo

ECU's sports teams, nicknamed the ''Pirates'', compete in NCAA Division I-A as a full-member of the 12 team Conference USA. Terry Holland, former Athletic Director and Head Basketball coach of the University of Virginia, is the Pirate's current Athletic Director.;;;; Facilities include the 43,000 seat Dowdy-Ficklen Stadium for football, the 8,000-seat Williams Arena at Minges Coliseum for men's and women's basketball, and the brand new US$12 million Clark-LeClair Stadium, with a seating capacity of 3,000 (max capacity of 6,000+ when including outfield &quot;Jungle&quot; areas) for baseball. The Ward Sports Medicine building comprises 82,095 square feet (7627&amp;nbsp;m²) and houses the athletic department, Pirate Club offices and the Human Performance Laboratory. Athletes train in the Murphy Center aedifice, housing the strength and conditioning facilities, along with banquet rooms, sport memorabilia, and an academic enhancement center. The Murphy Center was built for approximately $13 million and opened its doors to ECU student-athletes in June 2002.;;;

=Traditions and events=
There are 314 registered organizations that contribute to a diverse and vibrant student life.;; Also a number of active and semi-active benevolent and philanthropic secret societies, such as Society of the Seven and The Order of the Cupola exist. Barefoot on the Mall is held every spring; it gathers musicians from all genres for an all-day concert and features various games, rides, and food vendors.;; It is held in the Mall area. Freeboot Friday are held every Friday evening before home football games in uptown Greenville. It offers free concerts, free food, children’s activities, and a beer and wine garden for adults.;; The Billy Taylor Jazz Festival gathers musicians from all parts of the world to participate in this unique two-day event.;; The Purple &amp; Gold Pigskin Pigout Party, held each spring, is a celebration of football at East Carolina. This event features a carnival, various cooking contests, barbecue, a car show, a celebrity golf tournament, a parade, free live entertainment, and the annual Purple &amp; Gold spring football game.;;

Administration

The current chancellor, Steven Ballard, has held that post since replacing interim chancellor William E. Shelton on June 1, 2004.;; There have been six presidents and seven chancellors in the university's history.;; The chancellor is chosen by the University of North Carolina Board of Governors on the recommendation of the board's president, and he reports to the 12-member Board of Trustees at ECU. Four of the twelve trustees are picked by the Governor of North Carolina, while the other eight are picked by the Board of Governors.The ECU student body president is an ''ex officio'' member of the Board of Trustees.;;

Notable alumni


Pirate graduates have been influential in teaching, business, and the arts. The most notable teaching alumnus is Ron Clark, a teacher, author, and founder of the Ron Clark Academy in Atlanta, Georgia.;;Actress Emily Procter and screenwriter Kevin Williamson, creator of ''Scream'' and ''Dawson’s Creek'', graduated from East Carolina. Sandra Bullock attended, but graduated later after leaving to pursue her acting career.;;;;;;Rich Atkinson wrote ''An Army at Dawn: The War in North Africa, 1942-1943'' and Dan Neil wrote criticism on automobiles; both received Pulitzer Prizes.;;;; James Maynard graduated with a degree in psychology and founded the Golden Corral restaurant chain.;;Kelly King is the current chief operating officer for BB&amp;T and graduated with an undergraduate degree in business accounting and a master's of business administration.;;

References


External links
* [http://www.ecu.edu/ ECU webpage]
* [http://www.ecupirates.com/ Official ECU athletics site]
* [http://www.theeastcarolinian.com/ The East Carolinian] - University's Newspaper
* [http://www.ecupirateclub.com/studentpc.html Student Pirate Club]
* [http://www.usnews.com/usnews/edu/college/directory/brief/drglance_2923_brief.php USNews College Brief] - USNews School Brief






Category:Universities and colleges in North Carolina
Category:East Carolina University
Category:Greenville, North Carolina
Category:Educational institutions established in 1907
Category:Southern Association of Colleges and Schools
Category:Public universities
Category:Oak Ridge Associated Universities
Category:University of North Carolina

de:East Carolina University
es:Universidad del Este de Carolina
fr:East Carolina University