

Hurricane Isis was the deadliest tropical cyclone and only hurricane to make landfall during the 1998 Pacific hurricane season. The ninth tropical storm and sixth hurricane of the season, Isis developed on September 1 out of the interaction between a tropical wave and a large low-level circulation to the southwest of Mexico. It moved northward, striking the extreme southeastern portion of the Baja California Peninsula before attaining hurricane status in the Gulf of California. Isis made landfall at Topolobampo in the state of Sinaloa on September 3 and quickly lost its low-level circulation. The remnants persisted for several days before dissipating in the U.S. state of Idaho.

In Mexico, Isis destroyed over 700&amp;nbsp;houses and killed 14&amp;nbsp;people, primarily due to its heavy rainfall which peaked at over 20&amp;nbsp;inches (500&amp;nbsp;mm) in southern Baja California Sur. The rainfall caused widespread damage to roads and railways, stranding thousands of people. Moisture from the remnants of Isis extended into the southwestern United States, resulting in light rainfall, dozens of traffic accidents, and power outages to thousands of residents in San Diego County.

Storm history

A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 14. It traveled westward, and on August 19 developed into the tropical depression which eventually became Hurricane Bonnie.;; The wave axis continued westward across the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea, and crossed Central America into the eastern Pacific Ocean on August 25. The wave decreased its forward speed while approaching a large low-level circulation over southern Mexico. A broad area of disturbed weather formed in association with the wave and the low-level circulation, and after persisting for several days developed a smaller low-level circulation on August 29 about 575&amp;nbsp;miles (925&amp;nbsp;km) south-southeast of Cabo San Lucas. On August 31, the two primary areas of convection were well-removed from the center, and by early on September 1, even though deep convection was still not well-organized, the low-cloud circulation was sufficiently well-defined that the National Hurricane Center designated it as Tropical Depression Ten-E while centered slightly less than 350&amp;nbsp;miles (565&amp;nbsp;km) south of Cabo San Lucas.;; Operationally, the system was not classified until 21&amp;nbsp;hours later.;;

The depression initially tracked slowly north-northwestward and gradually strengthened. Late on September 1 it intensified into Tropical Storm Isis while located about 200&amp;nbsp;miles (320&amp;nbsp;km) south of Cabo San Lucas.; Upon becoming a tropical storm, the deep convection was not organized, with one forecaster describing Isis as a large monsoon-like system.; A mid-level trough extending southward from the Arizona/California border resulted in the storm to accelerate northward. The storm quickly strengthened; six hours after Isis became a tropical storm it reached winds of 70&amp;nbsp;mph (115&amp;nbsp;km/h).; Very deep, symmetrical convection developed over the poorly-defined center of circulation while banding features began to form, though ill-defined outflow and land interaction with the Baja California Peninsula initially prevented further strengthening.;; At 1200 UTC on September 2, Isis made landfall on extreme southeastern Baja California Sur as a strong tropical storm, and subsequently turned to the north-northeast.;

After entering the Gulf of California, an eye began to become apparent on visible satellite imagery, and it is estimated Isis attained hurricane status late on September 2. It maintained its intensity as it continued northward, and struck Topolobampo in the state of Sinaloa early on September 3 as a minimal hurricane. Isis weakened to a tropical storm a few hours after landfall, and subsequent to turning to the north-northwest the low-level circulation dissipated over Sierra Madre Occidental.; The remnants entered southern Arizona on September 4 and tracked around an upper-level low. After entering Nevada on September 5, the remnants of Isis passed into Oregon before dissipating in Idaho on September 8.;;

Preparations
Coinciding with the issuance of the first advisory on Isis, the government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning from Dolores to Puerto Cortex along the Baja California Peninsula. Early on September 2, the warning was extended from Santa Rosalía, Baja California Sur|Santa Rosalía to Punta Abreojos, while an additional tropical storm warning was issued from El Dorado to Guaymas. After Isis became a hurricane, officials issued a hurricane warning from Dolores to Punta San Gabriel on the Baja California Peninsula and from El Dorado to Bahía Kino on the mainland.;

2,500&amp;nbsp;residents in Baja California Sur were evacuated to emergency shelters. Officials closed the port at Mazatlán and recommended fisherman along the coast of the Gulf of California to remain at port.;; Officials set up 49&amp;nbsp;shelters on the mainland to provide evacuees with food, clothing and medical attention.;; The Mexican Army assisted residents in evacuation, while the Mexican Navy provided medical aid and assistance to boat owners. More than 24,000 were sheltered during the storm.;;

Impact
=Mexico=
Rainfall Summary for Hurricane Isis
Isis first affected Baja California Sur on September 2 as a tropical storm. Shortly after making landfall, a weather reporting station at San José del Cabo recorded sustained winds of 26&amp;nbsp;mph (42&amp;nbsp;km/h), with gusts reaching up to 46&amp;nbsp;mph (74&amp;nbsp;km/h). A station on the Islas Marías also reported sustained winds of 54&amp;nbsp;mph (87&amp;nbsp;km/h).; The winds left widespread areas without power or telephone.; The storm produced heavy rainfall in the southern portion of the peninsula, including a 24&amp;ndash;hour total of 12.99&amp;nbsp;inches (330&amp;nbsp;mm) at Los Cabos; and a peak rainfall total of 24.02&amp;nbsp;inches (610&amp;nbsp;mm) at Santiago.; A married couple were killed after attempting to cross a flooded stream in Los Cabos.;;; Initially, reports indicated a family was missing in La Paz, though they were later proven false.; Flooding from the storm closed all roads to the north of Los Cabos and caused damage to the roads in the area. Mudslides from the rain buried at least 120 cars in the area.;

Rainfall reached over 10&amp;nbsp;inches (250&amp;nbsp;mm) in the coastal region of Jalisco, with lighter amounts of precipitation extending further to the southeast and northeast.; One person was reported missing in Jalisco.; The heaviest 24&amp;ndash;hour rainfall total in the state of Sinaloa was 8.66&amp;nbsp;inches (220&amp;nbsp;mm), whereas in Sonora a maximum of 4.72&amp;nbsp;inches (120&amp;nbsp;mm) of rain were recorded.; Strong waves from the hurricane struck the Mexican mainland, with four people injured at Mazatlán when their boat washed onto rocks and was destroyed.; Rainfall from the storm flooded 15&amp;nbsp;communities in and around Mazatlán, with the Mexican Army assisting residents in emergency evacuations.; At Los Mochis, near the point where Isis made landfall, the passage of the hurricane resulted in the destruction of 300&amp;nbsp;homes, as well as in 7&amp;nbsp;fatalities.;; Throughout the city, strong winds from the hurricane downed street posts, tree limbs, and power lines, with one person seriously injured from a downed power line. Additionally, the roof of a gas station collapsed from the winds.; More than 1,200&amp;nbsp;bus passengers in Sinaloa were stranded due to road closures from the hurricane,; including the closure of the coastal highway in the southern portion of Sinaloa as it had been washed out due to floodwaters. Rainfall from the storm caused severe river flooding in some locations, with authorities advising those living along the Fuerte River to be prepared for a possible evacuation.;; The winds from Isis left about 120,000 in the municipality of Ahome without power.;

Throughout Mexico, the passage of Hurricane Isis resulted in 14&amp;nbsp;deaths and the loss of 769&amp;nbsp;homes,; with property damage estimates totaling over $5&amp;nbsp;million (1998&amp;nbsp;USD, 50&amp;nbsp;million 1998&amp;nbsp;MXN, $6.2&amp;nbsp;million 2006&amp;nbsp;USD).;; According to a speech by President Ernesto Zedillo, Isis damaged the water systems in 173&amp;nbsp;localities; it also damaged 154&amp;nbsp;primary schools and 9&amp;nbsp;high schools, minorly in most cases, causing the schools to be closed for around a week. 730&amp;nbsp;miles (1175&amp;nbsp;km) of railroad track were damaged by mudslides or flooding, with one bridge entirely destroyed and another four damaged.;

=United States=
Thunderstorms from the remnants of Isis dropped more than 2&amp;nbsp;inches (50&amp;nbsp;mm) of rainfall across southern Arizona, resulting in some flash flood warnings and flooding on roadways.;; The heaviest rainfall fell across the Santa Catalina and Rincon Mountains near Tucson, which saw precipitation amounts of up to 3&amp;nbsp;inches (75&amp;nbsp;mm). Otherwise, no flooding was reported in the Tucson area, with the Tucson International Airport reporting only 1.1&amp;nbsp;inches (28&amp;nbsp;mm) as a result of the storm.;;

The moisture extended into southern California and produced moderate precipitation across the region. Bakersfield reported a one-day rainfall record on September 4 with 0.23&amp;nbsp;inches (5.8&amp;nbsp;mm) of precipitation, breaking the previous record of 0.17&amp;nbsp;inches (4.3&amp;nbsp;mm) set in 1963. Rainfall amounts at Frazier Park peaked at 1.53&amp;nbsp;inches (39&amp;nbsp;m). Agricultural losses, primarily from vintners and raisin growers, rose up to $5&amp;nbsp;million in damage (1998&amp;nbsp;USD, $6.12&amp;nbsp;million 2006&amp;nbsp;USD), either directly due to rain or indirectly due to the additional steps to treat the increase in fungus activity on produce.;; Slick roads from the rain resulted in nearly 80 traffic accidents in San Diego County, ranging from fender benders to moderate injuries. Thunderstorms from the remnants of Isis damaged a San Diego Gas &amp; Electric substation at Kearny Mesa, leaving 10,000 without power; the outage was short lived and completely restored within 2&amp;nbsp;hours. About 1,000&amp;nbsp;homes and businesses were temporarily without power in Escondido, and another 2,700 lost electricity in Rancho Bernardo. Rainfall in and around San Diego reached a maximum of 0.5&amp;nbsp;inches (13&amp;nbsp;mm) at La Mesa.;; Heavy clouds from Isis produced scattered rainfall and temporary relief to severe heat conditions in the Los Angeles area.;;

Moisture from the remnants of Isis spread across the southwestern United States, with rainfall reaching over 0.75&amp;nbsp;inches (19&amp;nbsp;mm) in Nevada and Utah. Low-level moisture dissipated as it continued inland, due to dry air, though upper-level moisture produced light rain across the Northwestern United States; Pocatello, Idaho recorded 0.59&amp;nbsp;inches (15&amp;nbsp;mm), while Missoula, Montana recorded 0.39&amp;nbsp;inches (10&amp;nbsp;mm).;;

Aftermath
Aid programs began immediately after Isis moved ashore and dissipated to provided support to the affected population. The Comisión Nacional del Agua distributed 1.6&amp;nbsp;million gallons (6&amp;nbsp;million liters) of water and provided repair equipment to the 173&amp;nbsp;localites whose water systems were damaged. More than 650&amp;nbsp;health workers worked to combat the spread of diseases, including monitoring sanitary conditions of water and foods, and sprayed nearly 9,900&amp;nbsp;acres (40&amp;nbsp;km²) of land to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes. The force also disinfected more than 6,600&amp;nbsp;latrines and removed more than 850 tons of sewage to prevent the spread of epidemic. No medical-related deaths occurred as a result of this attention.;

By 24&amp;nbsp;hours after the passage of the hurricane, workers had restored power to 70% of the affected residents in Sinaloa, and by six days after the storm, electrical service was completely restored. The damage to the federal highway between Culiacán and Los Mochis along the coastal region of Sinaloa was restored about 48&amp;nbsp;hours after the passage of the hurricane. The rehabilitation of the agricultural infrastructure began immediately, and most of the drainage networks were repaired by about two weeks after the hurricane. About half of the damaged railways were repaired by about a month after the storm. The total cost for reconstruction and aid amounted to about $18.5&amp;nbsp;million (1998&amp;nbsp;USD, 175&amp;nbsp;million 1998&amp;nbsp;MXN, $23.3&amp;nbsp;million 2007&amp;nbsp;USD), about 94% from federal funds and the rest from state funding. A portion of the funding was allocated to assist the reconstruction of destroyed houses.;

Because the damage Isis caused was neither extreme nor exceptional, the name Isis was not retired by the World Meteorological Organization. It was re-used for 2004 Pacific hurricane season#Hurricane Isis|a storm in the in 2004 Pacific hurricane season, and continues to be on the list of tropical cyclone names for the Post-2008 Pacific hurricane seasons|2010 season.

References


See also

* List of Baja California Peninsula hurricanes
* List of notable Pacific hurricanes
* Tropical cyclone rainfall climatology

External links
*[http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/1998ISISadv.html The NHC's archive] on Hurricane Isis.

Category:1998 Pacific hurricane season|Isis
Category:Category 1 Pacific hurricanes|Isis (1998)
Category:Hurricanes in Baja California Sur|Isis (1998)
Category:Hurricanes in Baja California|Isis (1998)
Category:Hurricanes in Sonora|Isis (1998)
Category:Arizona hurricanes|Isis (1998)
Category:California hurricanes|Isis (1998)