:''This article is about the DC Comics character. For the Marvel Comics character see Black Racer (comics). For the snakes, see ''Coluber constrictor'' (North and Central America) and ''Alsophis ater'' (Jamaica).''


The Black Racer is a fictional deity and avatar of death published by DC Comics. he first appeared in ''New Gods'' vol. 1 #3 (July 1971), and was created by Jack Kirby.

Fictional character biography
The Black Racer's corporeal form is that of the otherwise bedridden Sgt. Willie Walker, who was paralyzed during the Vietnam War. Walker was contacted by the Source when Darkseid first brought the war of the gods to Earth, and told it was his responsibility to take on the role.
The Racer makes use of skis as his means of transport, much as Silver Surfer (another Kirby creation) used a surfboard for transportation through space. This similarity is commented on in an issue of Young Justice; when told that &quot;Death is coming...on skis!&quot; Superboy remarks &quot;Skis? What's next, a surfboard?&quot;. New Gods are collected by the Racer at the moment of their deaths, and taken to Hadis (the Fourth World version of Hades).

According to ''Captain Atom'' #42 the Black Racer represents &quot;death as inevitability&quot;, whereas Death of the Endless represents &quot;death as compassionate release&quot;. This has been contested by Neil Gaiman, who says that Death of the Endless is the ultimate incarnation of death in the DC Universe. However,in ''Adventures of Superman'' # 500, part of the Death of Superman storyline, Jonathan Kent ventures into the afterlife where his guide is none other than the Black Racer (Apparently, Death of the Endless could not be used). 

During the ''Our Worlds at War'' crossover, he came to harvest Steel's soul, but Superman talked him out of it. In the ''Darkseid Vs. Galactus'' crossover, Silver Surfer talked the Racer from claiming Orion. This was a highly unusual occurrence; the Black Racer is usually implacable.

=Seven Soldiers= 
In Grant Morrison's miniseries ''Seven Soldiers: Mister Miracle'', the Black Racer appears as a wheelchair-bound man (probably ''not'' Willie Walker, as he appears Caucasian), following the destruction of Apokolips and New Genesis. He has a bet with Metron as to whether Mister Miracle will be successful in saving the New Gods.

=Death of the New Gods= 

Willie Walker was killed in the first issue of the eight-part ''Death of the New Gods'' mini-series. He was killed by an unidentified figure who tore his heart out. Serifan of the Forever People was seen exiting the room after his death.

Other versions
* In the Marvel Comics universe, a supervillain named Black Racer is a member of the Serpent Society and is named for the snake.
* It should also be noted that Doorman from the Marvel parody comic Great Lakes Avengers becomes a personification of Death and also flies using skis which is possibly a reference to Black Racer.

External links
* [http://www.dcuguide.com/who.php?name=blackracer DCU Guide: Black Racer]



Category:Black superheroes
Category:DC Comics characters who can fly
Category:DC Comics cosmic entities
Category:DC Comics deities
Category:DC Comics immortals
Category:DC Comics superheroes
Category:Fictional Vietnam veterans
Category:Jack Kirby's Fourth World
Category:Mythology in comics
Category:Personifications of death

de:New Gods#Black Racer