

Hurricane Alberto resulted in the worst flooding in western Cuba in over 32 years. The first tropical storm and hurricane of the 1982 Atlantic hurricane season, Alberto developed from a tropical disturbance on June 2 in the southern Gulf of Mexico. It rapidly organized and attained hurricane status the following day, the earliest date for a hurricane in the Atlantic Ocean since 1970 Atlantic hurricane season#Hurricane Alma|Hurricane Alma in May of 1970. Shortly after reaching peak winds off 85&amp;nbsp;mph (140&amp;nbsp;km/h), Alberto rapidly weakened due to approaching upper-level winds. Initial forecasts predicted the hurricane to continue northeastward into Florida; it turned sharply westward and drifted erratically for several days across the eastern Gulf of Mexico before dissipating on June 6.

Alberto produced heavy rainfall in western Cuba, causing flash flooding and severe damage. The storm damaged 8,745 houses and destroyed 154 buildings, leaving hundreds homeless. Heavy rainfall persisted in the country for several weeks after the storm, and damage from Alberto amounting to about $85&amp;nbsp;million (1982&amp;nbsp;USD, $178&amp;nbsp;million 2006&amp;nbsp;USD). At least 23&amp;nbsp;people were killed in the country. Initially, Alberto was forecasted to continue northeastward and strike Florida, though its turn and rapid weakening resulted in minor effects in the state. 

Storm history

In late May, a tropical disturbance gradually developed over the northwestern portion of the Caribbean Sea. It drifted westward into the Yucatán Peninsula, and on June 1 the convection organized into a circular cloud pattern in association with a low pressure system. The system tracked northeastward into the Gulf of Mexico while continuing to organize, and subsequent to the formation of a low-level circulation it developed into Tropical Depression One while located about 40&amp;nbsp;miles (65&amp;nbsp;km) north-northwest of Cancún. Reconnaissance Aircraft confirmed the existence of the tropical depression later that day.;; Early on June 3, it is estimated the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Alberto while located about 150&amp;nbsp;miles (240&amp;nbsp;km) north-northwest of the western tip of Cuba, based on a ship report of 45&amp;nbsp;mph (75&amp;nbsp;km/h) winds about 115&amp;nbsp;miles (185&amp;nbsp;km) south of its center.;; An Air Force flight was scheduled into the storm, though was forbidden by the Cuban government due to its presence in Cuban airspace.;;

Alberto quickly strengthened while moving northeastward through the southeastern Gulf of Mexico, and intensified into a hurricane about nine hours after attaining tropical storm status. Late on June 3, Alberto attained peak winds of 85&amp;nbsp;mph (140&amp;nbsp;km/h) while located about 120&amp;nbsp;miles (195&amp;nbsp;km) west-southwest of Key West, Florida. Shortly after peaking in intensity, strong upper-level westerly winds impacted the deep convection of the storm. By early on June 4 Alberto weakened to a tropical storm after turning sharply westward due to weak steering currents. It drifted erratically as the circulation became exposed, and early on June 5 it degenerated into a convectiveless tropical depression. As a tropical depression, Alberto drifted to the east-northeast and later turned to the east, and late on June 6 it dissipated while located about 70&amp;nbsp;miles (115&amp;nbsp;km) off the coast of Florida.;

Preparations
Due to its sudden development and project track into southwest Florida, the National Hurricane Center issued a tropical storm warning and hours later a hurricane warning from the Dry Tortugas to Marathon in the Florida Keys and along the southwestern coastline northward to Fort Myers. A hurricane watch was also issued from Marathon to Jupiter Inlet.; At the time of the issuance of the hurricane warning, Alberto had been moving steadily northeastward; extrapolating its motion indicated a landfall on Key West within 12 hours and a mainland landfall at Key Largo within 24&amp;nbsp;hours. Additionally, most computer models predicted Alberto to continue northeastward across south Florida. Only one model, not available until later, suggested a weakness in steering currents that would prevent a Florida landfall.;; Officials ordered mandatory evacuations along the southwest coast of Florida. More than 1,000 left their homes to stay in nine emergency shelters.;; Air Florida canceled all flights from Miami to Key West. Many residents in the lower Florida Keys were unable to evacuate to the mainland, with about 50&amp;nbsp;people in Key West evacuating to 4&amp;nbsp;emergency shelters set up in the city. Officials closed schools in Monroe County at midday on June 3 and also sent all nonessential city and county employees home.;;

Impact
Rainfall Summary for Hurricane Alberto
The rainbands of Alberto produced heavy rainfall and flash flooding across western Cuba. The rainfall peaked at 39.84&amp;nbsp;inches (1012&amp;nbsp;mm), the fourth highest rainfall total in the country since 1963.;; Hundreds of Cubans were left homeless from the flooding.; More than 50,000 were forced to evacuate from the resulting floods,;; which were described as the worst flooding in the northwestern portion of the country since 1950.;; The storm downed about 250,000&amp;nbsp;banana trees;; and damaged 8,745&amp;nbsp;houses,;; including 71&amp;nbsp;destroyed homes throughout Pinar del Rio Province and 83 collapsed buildings in the capital city of Havana.; Six&amp;nbsp;factories in Havana Province were also damaged.;; Across western Cuba, the passage of Alberto left several districts in Havana without electricity and also blocked telegraph, telephone, and mail service. The Cuban military was deployed to rescue those trapped in flooded homes and also to remove fallen trees.; By two days after its closest approach, the death toll in Cuba reached 11,; and raised to 23&amp;nbsp;fatalities a day later.;; The final death toll is reported either as 23; or 24, with one report indicating 17&amp;nbsp;people missing;; Pinar del Rio Province reported at least 20&amp;nbsp;deaths and Havana reported 3 &amp;nbsp;casualties.; Heavy rainfall continued for weeks after the passage of Alberto, resulting in severe damage to the tobacco crop. 1.8&amp;nbsp;million&amp;nbsp;lb. (900,000&amp;nbsp;kg) of the recently finished harvest were destroyed when winds and rain damaged storage sheds; 2.6&amp;nbsp;million&amp;nbsp;lb. (1.3&amp;nbsp;million&amp;nbsp;kg) of tobacco leaves were also damaged. Throughout Pinar del Rio Province, the effects of Alberto included hundreds of destroyed homes, thousands of damaged houses, and 400&amp;nbsp;drowned cattle.;; Damage amounted to an estimated $85&amp;nbsp;million (1982&amp;nbsp;USD, $178&amp;nbsp;million 2006&amp;nbsp;USD).;;

Gale force winds and heavy rainfall were reported in the lower Florida Keys;; Key West reported 6.25&amp;nbsp;inches (160&amp;nbsp;mm) during a 24&amp;nbsp;hour period, with the maximum reported winds at a land station being 70&amp;nbsp;mph (115&amp;nbsp;km/h) in the Dry Tortugas.; Moderate rainfall was reported throughout southern Florida and the eastern Florida Keys, as well, peaking at 16.47&amp;nbsp;inches (418&amp;nbsp;mm) at Tavernier.;; Alberto spawned three tornadoes and a waterspout in the Florida Keys,;; one of which at Stock Island which damaged several boats.; One of the three tornadoes picked up a moving car and lightly injured the driver, while another one knocked down two telephone poles on the Overseas Highway which resulted in an hour traffic delay.; Damage from the tornadoes totaled $275,000 (1982&amp;nbsp;USD, $575,000 2006&amp;nbsp;USD).;;;; Off the coast, high waves from Alberto nearly sank a boat, though its occupants were later rescued and unharmed.;

Despite the damage and deaths, the name Alberto was not retired; it was re-used in 1988, 1994, 2000, and 2006.

References


See also

* List of notable Atlantic hurricanes
* List of wettest tropical cyclones by country#Cuba|List of wettest tropical cyclones in Cuba since 1963
* List of Florida hurricanes
* Tropical cyclone rainfall climatology



Category:1982 Atlantic hurricane season|Alberto
Category:Category 1 Atlantic hurricanes|Alberto (1982)
Category:Hurricanes in Cuba|Alberto (1982)
Category:Florida hurricanes|Alberto (1982)