;


| birth_place = Branford, Connecticut
| death_date = 
| death_place = Chicago, Illinois 
| residence = Chicago, Illinois
| office = Mayor of La Salle, Illinois
| term_start = 1854
| term_end = 1855
| predecessor = 
| successor = 
| party = 
| religion = Presbyterian;;
| spouse = Isabella Farnsworth Norton
| children = none
| website = 
}}

Timothy Beach Blackstone (March 28, 1829 – May 26, 1900) served as president of the Chicago and Alton Railroad from 1864 through 1899. He was also a one-term mayor of La Salle, Illinois, and a founding president of the Union Stock Yards.He was also the benefactor of the James Blackstone Memorial Library in Branford, Connecticut, and a nearly identical library was donated to the Chicago Public Library by Timothy Blackstone's widow in 1902.Additionally, the Blackstone's funded Blackstone Hall at for the Art Institute of Chicago's Building.;&quot;The Art Institute of Chicago Museum Studies'&quot; Volume 14, no. 1, p. 10, 1988, The Art Institute of Chicago, p. 8, ISBN 0-226-02813-5.; Chicago's Blackstone Library is the first dedicated branch of the Chicago Public Library system,;; and later his mansion became the site of the Blackstone Hotel and the Blackstone Theatre.

Early life
Blackstone was born in Branford, Connecticut, the sixth child, and fourth son, of James Blackstone and Sarah Beach. His father, James, served in the Connecticut Senate representing the sixth district. The family is descended from William Blaxton, who arrived in New England in the seventeenth century.;Ida Hinman. &quot;[http://www.dangel.net/AMERICA/Blackstone/TimothyBeachBlackstone.html Biography of Timothy B. Blackstone].&quot; Methodist Book Concern Press, 1917.;William Blackstone is a distant cousin.; ;

Health issues caused Blackstone to drop out of school in 1847, and he began working for Roswell B. Mason, surveying the New York and New Haven Railroad.He only worked on the NY&amp;NH for a year before becoming an assistant engineer on the Stockbridge and Pittsfield Railroad.Again, he only remained with the firm a short time before leaving for the Vermont Valley Railroad.In 1851, Roswell invited Blackstone to supervise construction of the Illinois Central Railroad between Bloomington and Dixon, Illinois.;Blackstone accepted the job and moved to La Salle, Illinois.; ;

Career and life
Blackstone was elected mayor of LaSalle in 1854 and served a single term, his only foray into elected office.After leaving office, he returned to working on railroads, first as chief engineer of the Joliet and Chicago Railroad, which would eventually become the Chicago and Alton Railroad.; ;Blackstone became president of the Joliet and Chicago Railroad in 1861,; ; and he kept the line solvent while other divisions were filing for bankruptcy.When the system was reorganized, he was named president of the board of directors for the company.John Drake (1826-1895)|John Drake also served on the Board of Directors.;Berger, Miles L., ''They Built Chicago: Entrepreneurs Who Shaped a Great City's Architecture'', Bonus Books, Inc., Chicago, 1992, p. 155., ISBN 0-929387-76-7.;Although Blackstone served with the Alton Railroad for more than a quarter century, he refused a salary. When the Board of Directors voted to pay him $10,000 per year, he turned it down.; ;

In 1899, a group of investors headed by E. H. Harriman wanted to purchase the Alton Railroad but Blackstone disapproved of the sale.After many months of wrangling, Blackstone transferred all of his stock in the company to the United States Trust Company and resigned as president, effective April 1, 1899.This action allowed the Harriman-led group to assume control of the line.;;

In addition to his employment and activities with the railroads, Blackstone was the first president of the company that controlled the Union Stock Yards.;Peggy Sullivan, &quot;Naming the Branches,&quot; ''Journal of the Caxton Club'', June 2006, p.1.;

In 1868, Blackstone married Isabella Farnsworth Norton, the daughter of a successful businessman from Norwich, Connecticut.

Blackstone died of pneumonia on May 26, 1900, in Chicago, Illinois. His funeral was held at the Second Presbyterian Church and was then transported to Norwich, Connecticut for burial.; ;

Blackstone Mansion
Blackstone built a mansion for himself at 252 Michigan Avenue in Chicago in what is now the Chicago Landmark Historic Michigan Boulevard District.; ; The property later became the site of the Blackstone Hotel and the Blackstone Theatre.; ;Following the Great Chicago Fire in 1871, he invited his friend John Crerar to stay with him, which Crerar proceeded to do for twelve years.Crerar donated the John Crerar Library and Blackstone continued to donate funds toward the maintenance of the building throughout his life. The Crerar Library has now merged with the University of Chicago

Bequests
Blackstone donated a library of 5,000 books and a building to Branford, Connecticut with the only stipulation that it be named in honor of his father. A charter was devised for the library by the Connecticut State Legislature vesting control of the library in a self-perpetuating board of trustees consisting of six residents of Branford and the librarian of Yale University.;; The building was designed by Chicago architect Solon Spencer Beman.; ;

In 1904, Isabella Blackstone donated the T.B. Blackstone Memorial Branch Library to the city of Chicago. Located at the intersection of Blackstone Avenue, Lake Park Avenue, and Forty-ninth Street, the library is modeled after the James Blackstone Library in Branford, Connecticut.Blackstone Avenuerunning along the 1436 eastblock from 4900 south (starting behind Blackstone Library) to 10350 south is named after him.;Hayner, Don and Tom McNamee, ''Streetwise Chicago'', &quot;Blackstone Avenue&quot;, p. 12, Loyola University Press, 1988, ISBN 0-8294-0597-6;

Also, the Blackstone's funded Blackstone Hall in the Art Institute of Chicago Building.This two story ground level ground-level gallery was added next to the east wall of the original building for display of architectural and sculptural casts.;

Support for Zionism
Blackstone was an early financial supporter of his cousin, William Eugene Blackstone,;; who in 1891 proposed giving Palestine to the Jews.It is not clear, however, whether this support is indicative of his personal position on the topic of zionism.

References


External links
* [http://www.blackstone.lioninc.org/history.htm James Blackstone Memorial Library]
* [http://www.chipublib.org/002branches/blackstone/blackstone.html Official Chicago Public Library T.B. Blackstone Memorial Branch Page]








Category:1829 births
Category:1900 deaths
Category:Alton Railroad
Category:American railroad executives of the 19th century
Category:People from Chicago
Category:Zionists