
| birth_place = Tsarskoye Selo, Russian Empire
| death_date = 
| death_place = Yekaterinburg, Russia
| parents = Tsar Nicholas II and Alexandra Fyodorovna of Hesse
}}

''Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia'' (Olga Nikolaevna Romanova) (in Russian Великая Княжна Ольга Николаевна;– July 17, 1918) was the eldest daughter of the last autocratic ruler of the Russian Empire, Emperor Nicholas II, and of Empress Alexandra of Russia.

During her lifetime, Olga's future marriage offered great speculation within Russia. Matches were rumored with Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich of Russia, Crown Prince Carol of Romania, Edward, Prince of Wales, eldest son of Britain's George V, and with Crown Prince Alexander of Serbia. Olga herself wanted to marry a Russian and remain in her home country. During World War I, Olga nursed wounded soldiers in a military hospital until her own nerves gave out and, thereafter, oversaw administrative duties at the hospital.

Olga's murder following the Russian Revolution of 1917 resulted in her canonization as a passion bearer by the Russian Orthodox Church.In later years, when dozens of people made claims to be surviving members of the imperial family, a woman named Marga Boodts claimed to be Grand Duchess Olga, but her claim was not taken seriously. Historians believe that Olga was assassinated along with her family at Ekaterinburg. Her remains were identified through DNA testing and were buried during a funeral ceremony in 1998 at Peter and Paul Cathedral in St. Petersburg along with those of her parents and two of her sisters. 

Early life and childhood
A formal portrait of (from left to right): Grand Duchesses Olga, Tatiana, Maria, and Anastasia Nikolaevna, 1906.
Besides Anastasia, Olga's other siblings were Grand Duchesses Tatiana, Maria and Tsarevich Alexei of Russia. Olga's Russian title (''Velikaya Knyazhna'' Великая Княжна) is most precisely translated as &quot;Grand Princess&quot;, meaning that Olga, as an &quot;imperial highness&quot; was higher in rank than other princesses in Europe who were &quot;royal highnesses&quot;. However, &quot;Grand Duchess&quot; is the usual English translation.;Zeepvat, p. xiv; Olga's friends and family generally called her simply Olga Nikolaevna or nicknamed her &quot;Olishka&quot; or &quot;Olya&quot;. Among her godparents was her great-grandmother, Queen Victoria. Olga was most often paired with her sister Tatiana. The two girls shared a room, dressed alike, and were known as &quot;The Big Pair&quot;.;Massie (1967), p. 135;

From her earliest years she was known for her compassionate heart and desire to help others, but also for her temper, blunt honesty and moodiness. As a small child, she once lost patience while posing for a portrait painter and told the man, &quot;You are a very ugly man and I don't like you one bit!&quot;;; The Tsar's children were raised as simply as possible, sleeping on hard camp cots unless they were ill, taking cold baths every morning.;Massie (1967), p. 132; Servants called Olga and her siblings by their first names and patronyms rather than by their royal titles.;Massie (1967), p. 135; However, Olga's governess and tutors also noted some of the autocratic impulses of the daughter of the Tsar of All the Russias, one of the wealthiest men in the world. On a visit to a museum where state carriages were on display, Olga once ordered one of the servants to prepare the largest and most beautiful carriage for her daily drive. Her wishes were not honored, much to the relief of her governess, Margaret Eagar. She also felt the rights of eldest children should be protected. When she was told the Biblical story of Joseph and his coat of many colors, she sympathized with the eldest brothers rather than Joseph. She also sympathized with Goliath rather than David in the Biblical story of David and Goliath.; When her French tutor, Pierre Gilliard, was teaching her the formation of French verbs and the use of auxiliaries, ten-year-old Olga responded, &quot;I see, monsieur. The auxiliaries are the servants of the verbs. It's only poor 'avoir' which has to shift for itself.'&quot;;;
Olga loved to read and, unlike her four siblings, enjoyed school work.
&quot;The eldest, Olga Nicolaevna, possessed a remarkably quick brain,&quot; recalled her French tutor, Pierre Gilliard. &quot;She had good reasoning powers as well as initiative, a very independent manner, and a gift for swift and entertaining repartee.&quot;; She enjoyed reading about politics and read newspapers. Olga also reportedly enjoyed choosing from her mother's book selection. When she was caught taking a book before her mother read it, she would tell Alexandra that she must wait to read the novel until Olga had determined whether it was an appropriate book for her to read.;Massie (1967), p. 133;

Margaret Eagar also noted that Olga was bright but said she had little experience with the world because of her sheltered life. She and her sisters had little understanding of money because they had not had an opportunity to shop in stores or to see money exchange hands. Young Olga once thought that a hat maker who came to the palace had given her a new hat as a present. Olga was once frightened when she witnessed a policeman arresting someone on the street. She thought the policeman would come to arrest her because she had behaved badly for Miss Eagar. When reading a history lesson, she remarked that she was glad she lived in current times, when people were good and not as evil as they had been in the past. When she was eight, in November 1903, Olga learned about death first hand when her first cousin, Princess Elisabeth of Hesse, died of typhoid fever while on a visit to the Romanovs at their Polish estate. &quot;My children talked much of cousin Ella and how God had taken her spirit, and they understood that later God would take her body also to heaven,&quot; wrote Eagar. &quot;On Christmas morning when Olga awoke, she exclaimed at once, 'Did God send for cousin Ella's body in the night?' I felt startled at such a question on Christmas morning, but answered, 'Oh, no, dear, not yet.' She was greatly disappointed, and said, 'I thought He would have sent for her to keep Christmas with Him.'&quot;;

Adolescence and relationships with parents
;Grand Duchess Olga reads a book as her sister Grand Duchess Anastasia looks on. Courtesy: Beinecke Library

&quot;Her chief characteristics&amp;nbsp;... were a strong will and a singularly straightforward habit of thought and action,&quot; wrote her mother's friend Anna Vyrubova, who recalled Olga's hot temper and her struggles to keep it under control. &quot;Admirable qualities in a woman, these same characteristics are often trying in childhood, and Olga as a little girl sometimes showed herself willful and even disobedient.&quot;;; Olga idolized her father and wore a necklace with an icon of St. Nicholas on her chest.;Radzinsky (1992), p. 358; She, like her siblings, enjoyed games of tennis and swimming with her father during their summer holidays and often confided in him when she went with him on long walks.;Massie (1967), p. 133; Though she also loved Alexandra, her relationship with her mother was somewhat strained during her adolescence and early adulthood. &quot;Olga is always most unamiable about every proposition, though may end by doing what I wish,&quot; wrote Alexandra to Nicholas on March 13, 1916. &quot;And when I am severe — sulks me.&quot;;Bokhanov et al., p. 124; In another letter to Nicholas during World War I, Alexandra complained that Olga's grumpiness, bad humor and general reluctance to make an official visit to the hospital where she usually worked as a Red Cross nurse made things difficult.;King and Wilson, p. 47; Olga also occasionally found her mother's attitude trying. Parlormaid Elizaveta Nikolaevna Ersberg told her niece that the Tsar paid closer attention to the children than Alexandra did and Alexandra often was ill with a migraine or quarreled with the servants.;Radzinsky, p. 116; In 1913, Olga complained in a letter to her grandmother, Dowager Empress Maria Feodorovna about her mother's invalidism. &quot;As usual her heart isn't well,&quot; Olga wrote. &quot;It's all so unpleasant.&quot;;King and Wilson, p. 46; Queen Marie of Romania, who met Olga and her sisters when they visited Romania on a state trip in 1914, commented in her memoirs that the girls were natural and confided in her when Alexandra wasn't present, but when she appeared &quot;they always seemed to be watching her every expression so as to be sure to act according to her desires.&quot;;King and Wilson, p. 45;

As an adolescent, Olga received frequent reminders from her mother to be an example for the other children and to be patient with her younger sisters and with her nurses. On January 11, 1909, Alexandra admonished thirteen-year old Olga for rudeness and bad behavior. She told the teenager that she must be polite to the servants, who looked after her well and did their best for her, and she should not make her nurse &quot;nervous&quot; when she was tired and not feeling well.;Maylunas and Mironenko, pp. 318–319.; Olga responded on January 12, 1909 that she would try to do better but it wasn't easy because her nurse became angry and cross with her for no good reason.;Maylunas and Mironenko, p. 319; However, Ersberg, one of the maids, told her niece that the servants sometimes had good reason to be cross with Olga because the eldest grand duchess could be spoiled, capricious, and lazy.;Radzinsky, ''The Last Tsar,'' p. 116; On January 24, 1909, Alexandra scolded the active teenager, who once signed another of her letters with the nickname &quot;Unmounted Cossack&quot;, again: &quot;You are growing very big — don't be so wild and kick about and show your legs, it is not pretty. I never did so when your age or when I was smaller and younger even.&quot;;Maylunas and Mironkenko, p. 320;

Three years later, Alexandra blamed sixteen-year-old Olga, who was sitting beside her seven-year-old brother, for failing to control the misbehaving Tsarevich Alexei during a family dinner. The spoiled Alexei teased others at the table, refused to sit up in his chair, wouldn't eat his food and licked his plate. The Tsarina's expectation was unreasonable, said Grand Duke Konstantin Konstantinovich of Russia, a distant cousin of the imperial family. &quot;Olga cannot deal with him,&quot; he wrote in his diary on March 18, 1912.;Maylunas and Mironenko, p. 352; Court official A. A. Mossolov wrote that Olga was already seventeen, but still &quot;she had the ways of a flapper,&quot; referring to her rough manners and liking for exuberant play.;;

Relationship with Grigori Rasputin
Formal portrait of (from left to right): Grand Duchesses Olga, Tatiana, Anastasia, and Maria Nikolaevna with their mother, 1913.
Despite his occasional misbehavior, Olga, like all her family, doted on the long-awaited heir Tsarevich Alexei, or &quot;Baby&quot;. The little boy suffered frequent attacks of hemophilia and nearly died several times. Like their mother, Olga and her three sisters were also potentially carriers of the hemophilia gene. Olga's younger sister Maria reportedly hemorrhaged in December 1914 during an operation to remove her tonsils, according to her paternal aunt Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia, who was interviewed later in her life. The doctor performing the operation was so unnerved that he had to be ordered to continue by Tsarina Alexandra. Olga Alexandrovna said she believed all four of her nieces bled more than was normal and believed they were carriers of the hemophilia gene like their mother, who inherited the trait from her maternal grandmother Queen Victoria.;Vorres, p. 115; Symptomatic carriers of the gene, while not haemophiliacs themselves, can have symptoms of hemophilia including a lower than normal blood clotting factor that can lead to heavy bleeding.;Zeepvat, p. 175;

Olga's mother relied on the counsel of Grigori Rasputin, a Russian peasant and wandering ''starets'' or &quot;holy man&quot;, and credited his prayers with saving the ailing Tsarevich on numerous occasions. Olga and her siblings were also taught to view Rasputin as &quot;Our Friend&quot; and to share confidences with him. In the autumn of 1907, Olga's aunt Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia was escorted to the nursery by the Tsar to meet Rasputin. Olga, her sisters and brother, were all wearing their long white nightgowns. &quot;All the children seemed to like him,&quot; Olga Alexandrovna recalled. &quot;They were completely at ease with him.&quot;;Massie (1967), pp. 199–200;

However, one of the girls' governesses, Sofia Ivanovna Tyutcheva, was horrified in 1910 that Rasputin was permitted access to the nursery when the four girls were in their nightgowns and wanted him barred. Although Rasputin's contacts with the children were completely innocent, Nicholas asked Rasputin to avoid going to the nurseries in the future to avoid further scandal. Alexandra eventually had the governess fired. Tyutcheva took her story to other members of the family.;Massie (1967), p. 208; Nicholas's sister Grand Duchess Xenia Alexandrovna of Russia was horrified by Tyutcheva's story. She wrote on March 15, 1910 that she couldn't understand:

:&quot;...the attitude of Alix and the children to that sinister Grigory (whom they consider to be almost a saint, when in fact he's only a ''khlyst''!) He's always there, goes into the nursery, visits Olga and Tatiana while they are getting ready for bed, sits there talking to them and ''caressing'' them. They are careful to hide him from Sofia Ivanovna, and the children don't dare talk to her about him. It's all quite unbelievable and beyond understanding.&quot;;Maylunas and Mironenko, p. 330;

Maria Ivanovna Vishnyakova, another nurse for the royal children, was at first a devotee of Rasputin, but later was disillusioned by him. She claimed that she was raped by Rasputin in the spring of 1910.;Radzinsky (2000), pp. 129–130.; The Empress refused to believe her and said that everything Rasputin did was holy. Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna was told that Vishnyakova's claim had been immediately investigated, but &quot;they caught the young woman in bed with a Cossack of the Imperial Guard.&quot; Vishnyakova was dismissed from her post in 1913.;Radzinsky (2000), pp. 129–130.;

It was whispered in society that Rasputin had seduced not only the Tsarina but also the four Grand Duchesses.;Hugo Mager, ''Elizabeth: Grand Duchess of Russia,'' Carroll and Graf Publishers, Inc., 1998, ISBN 0-7867-0678-3; Rasputin had released ardent, though by all accounts completely innocent in nature, letters written by the Tsarina and the four grand duchesses to him. They circulated throughout society, fueling rumors. Pornographic cartoons circulated depicting Rasputin having relations with the empress, with her four daughters and Anna Vyrubova nude in the background.;Christopher, Kurth, and Radzinsky, p. 115.; Nicholas ordered Rasputin to leave St. Petersburg for a time, much to Alexandra's displeasure, and Rasputin went on a pilgrimage to Palestine.;Christopher, Kurth, and Radzinsky, p. 116; Despite the rumors, the imperial family's association with Rasputin continued until Rasputin was murdered on December 17, 1916. &quot;Our Friend is so contented with our girlies, says they have gone through heavy 'courses' for their age and their souls have much developed,&quot; Alexandra wrote to Nicholas on December 6, 1916, a few weeks before Rasputin was killed.;Maylunas and Mironenko, p. 489; However, as she grew older, Olga was less inclined to see Rasputin as her friend and was more aware of how his friendship with her parents affected the stability of her country. Olga wrote in her diary the day after the murder that she suspected Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich of Russia, her first cousin once removed and the man she had at one time been expected to marry, was the murderer of &quot;Father Grigory.&quot;;Radzinsky, ''The Rasputin File'', p. 481; Dmitri and Felix Yussupov, the husband of her first cousin Princess Irina of Russia, were among the murderers. In his memoirs, A. A. Mordvinov reported that the four grand duchesses appeared &quot;cold and visibly terribly upset&quot; by Rasputin's death and sat &quot;huddled up closely together&quot; on a sofa in one of their bedrooms on the night they received the news. Mordvinov reported that the young women were in a gloomy mood and seemed to sense the political upheaval that was about to be unleashed.;Maylunas and Mironenko, p. 507; Rasputin was buried with an icon signed on the reverse side by Olga, her sisters and mother. However, Olga was the only member of the family who did not attend Rasputin's funeral, according to the diary of her first cousin once removed Grand Duke Andrei Vladimirovich of Russia.;Maylunas and Mironenko, p. 511; According to the memoirs of Valentina Ivanovna Chebotareva, a woman who nursed with Olga during World War I, Olga said in February 1917, about a month after the murder, that while it might have been necessary for Rasputin to be killed, it should never have been done &quot;so terribly.&quot; She was ashamed that the murderers were her relatives.; Gregory P. Tschebotarioff, ''Russia: My Native Land: A U.S. engineer reminisces and looks at the present,'' McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1964, p. 61;

Inspired by her religious upbringing, Olga took control of a portion of her sizable fortune when she was twenty and began to respond independently to requests for charity. One day when she was out for a drive she saw a young child using crutches. She asked about the child and learned that the youngster's parents were too poor to afford treatment. Olga set aside an allowance to cover the child's medical bills.;Massie, p. 136; A court official, Alexander Mossolov, recalled that Olga's character was &quot;even, good, with an almost angelic kindness&quot; by the time she was a young woman.;Maylunas and Mironenko, p. 370;

Romances and marital prospects
;Grand Duchesses Olga, left, Tatiana, right, and Maria Nikolaevna, center, ca. 1911, with Pavel Voronov, the officer Olga fell in love with in 1913.

Olga was a chestnut-blonde with bright blue eyes, a broad face and a turned up nose. She was considered less pretty than her sisters Maria and Tatiana,;Massie, ''Nicholas and Alexandra,'' pp. 132–133; though her appearance improved as she grew older. &quot;As a child she was plain, at fifteen she was beautiful,&quot; wrote her mother's friend Lili Dehn. &quot;She was slightly above the medium height, with a fresh complexion, deep blue eyes, quantities of light chestnut hair, and pretty hands and feet.&quot;;&quot;Dehn, Lili (1922). &quot;[http://www.alexanderpalace.org/realtsaritsa/ The Real Tsaritsa]&quot;. ISBN 5-3000-2285-3 Retrieved on February 22, 2007;

Olga and her younger sisters were surrounded by young men assigned to guard them at the palace and on the imperial yacht Standard and were used to mingling with them and sharing holiday fun during their annual summer cruises. When Olga was fifteen, a group of officers aboard the imperial yacht gave her a portrait of Michelangelo's nude David, cut out from a newspaper, as a present for her name day on July 11, 1911. &quot;Olga laughed at it long and hard,&quot; her indignant fourteen-year-old sister Tatiana wrote to her aunt Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia. &quot;And not one of the officers wishes to confess that he has done it. Such swine, aren't they?&quot;;Bokhanov et al., p. 123;

;Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna and Pavel Voronov, ca. 1912. Olga fell in love with Voronov and was distressed when he married, though she wished him well. Courtesy: Beinecke Library.

At the same time the teenage Olga was enjoying her innocent flirtations, society was buzzing about her future marriage. In November 1911 a full dress ball was held at Livadia to celebrate her sixteenth birthday and her entry into society. Her hair was put up for the first time and her first ballgown was pink. Her parents gave her a diamond ring and a diamond and pearl necklace as a birthday present and symbol that she had become a young woman.;Massie (1967), p. 179; A. Bogdanova, the wife of a general and hostess of a monarchist salon, wrote in her diary the following summer, on June 7, 1912, that Olga had been betrothed the previous night to Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich of Russia, her first cousin once removed. In his book ''The Rasputin File'', Edvard Radzinsky speculates that the betrothal was broken off due to Dmitri's dislike for Grigori Rasputin, his association with Felix Yussupov and rumors that Dmitri was bisexual.;Radzinsky (2000), pp. 181–182; However, no other sources mention an official betrothal to Dmitri Pavlovich. Before World War I, there was also some discussion of a marriage between Olga and Prince Carol of Romania, but Olga did not like Carol. During a visit to Romania in the spring of 1914, she struggled to make small talk with the Romanian crown prince.;Sullivan, p. 281; Carol's mother, Queen Marie of Romania, was unimpressed with Olga as well, finding her manners too brusque and her broad, high cheek-boned face &quot;not pretty.&quot;;Sullivan, p. 280; The plans were, in any event, put on hold upon the outbreak of war in 1914. Prince Edward, eldest son of England's George V, and Crown Prince Alexander of Serbia were also discussed as potential suitors, though none were considered seriously. Olga told Gilliard that she wanted to marry a Russian and remain in her own country. She said her parents would not force her marry anyone she could not like.;Massie, p. 252;

While society was discussing matches with princes, Olga fell in love with a succession of officers. In late 1913, Olga fell in love with Pavel Voronov, a junior officer on the imperial yacht ''Standart'', but such a relationship would have been impossible due to their differing ranks. Voronov was engaged a few months later to one of the ladies in waiting. &quot;God grant him good fortune, my beloved,&quot; a saddened Olga wrote on his wedding day, &quot;It's sad, distressing.&quot;;Zeepvat, p. 110; Later, in her diaries of 1915 and 1916, Olga frequently mentioned a man named Mitya with great affection.;

;Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna with some of the soldiers she nursed in 1915. Olga was particularly fond of a wounded soldier named Dmitri Chakh-Bagov. Courtesy: Beinecke Library.

According to the diary of Valentina Chebotareva, a woman who nursed with Olga during World War I, Olga's &quot;golden Mitya&quot; was Dmitri Chakh-Bagov, a wounded soldier she cared for when she was a Red Cross nurse. Chebotareva wrote that Olga's love for him was &quot;pure, naive, without hope&quot; and that she tried to avoid revealing her feelings to the other nurses. She talked to him regularly on the telephone, was depressed when he left the hospital, and jumped about exuberantly when she received a message from him. Dmitri Chakh-Bagov adored Olga and talked of killing Rasputin for her if she only gave the word, because it was the duty of an officer to protect the imperial family even against their will. However, he also reportedly showed other officers the letters Olga had written to him when he was drunk.;; Another young man, Volodia Volkomski, appeared to have affection for her as well. &quot;(He) always has a smile or two for her,&quot; wrote Alexandra to Nicholas on December 16, 1916.;Maylunas and Mironenko, pp. 491–492;

Other suitors within the family were suggested, among them Olga's first cousin once removed Grand Duke Boris Vladimirovich of Russia. Alexandra refused to entertain the idea of her innocent daughter marrying the jaded, much older Boris Vladimirovich. &quot;An inexperienced girl would suffer terribly, to have her husband 4, or 5th hand or more,&quot; Alexandra wrote.;Zeepvat, p. 224; She was also aware that Olga's heart lay elsewhere.;Maylunas and Mironenko, p. 453;

Early adulthood and World War I
;Grand Duchesses Maria, Tatiana, and Olga Nikolaevna in 1916.

Olga experienced her first brush with violence at age fifteen, when she witnessed the assassination of the government minister Pyotr Stolypin during a performance at the Kiev Opera House. &quot;Olga and Tatiana had followed me back to the box and saw everything that happened,&quot; Tsar Nicholas II wrote to his mother, Dowager Empress Maria, on September 10, 1911. &quot;...It had made a great impression on Tatiana, who cried a lot, and they both slept badly.&quot;;Maylunas and Mironenko, p. 344.; Three years later, she saw gunshot wounds close up when she trained to become a Red Cross nurse. Olga, her sister Tatiana, and her mother Tsarina Alexandra treated wounded soldiers at a hospital on the grounds of Tsarskoye Selo.

Olga was disdainful of her cousin Princess Irina of Russia's husband Felix Yussupov, the man who eventually murdered Rasputin in December 1916. Yussupov had taken advantage of a law permitting men who were only sons to avoid military service. He was in civilian dress at a time when many of the Romanov men and the wounded soldiers Olga cared for were fighting. &quot;Felix is a 'downright civilian', dressed all in brown, walked to and fro about the room, searching in some bookcases with magazines and virtually doing nothing; an utterly unpleasant impression he makes — a man idling in such times,&quot; Olga wrote to her father, Tsar Nicholas, on March 5, 1915 after paying a visit to the Yussupovs.;Bokhanov et al., p. 240; She was also strongly patriotic. In July 1915, while discussing the wedding of an acquaintance with fellow nurses, Olga said she understood why the ancestry of the groom's German grandmother was being kept hidden. &quot;Of course he has to conceal it,&quot; she burst out. &quot;I quite understand him, she may perhaps be a real bloodthirsty German.&quot;;Tschebotarioff, p. 57; Olga's unthinking comments hurt her mother, who had been born in Germany, reported fellow nurse Valentina Ivanovna Chebotareva.;Tschebotarioff, p. 57;
Nursing during the war provided Olga and her sister Tatiana with exposure to experiences they had not previously had. The girls enjoyed talking with fellow nurses at the hospital, women they would never have met if not for the war, and knew the names of their children and their family stories.;Tschebotarioff, p. 60; On one occasion, when a lady in waiting who usually picked up the girls from the hospital was detained and sent a carriage without an attendant, the two girls decided to go shopping in a store when they had a break. They ordered the carriage driver to stop in a shopping district and went into a store where they were not recognized because of their nursing uniforms. However, they discovered that they didn't know how to buy anything because they had never used money. The next day they asked Chebotareva how to go about purchasing an item from a store.;Tschebotarioff, p. 60;

Olga cared for and pitied the soldiers she helped to treat. However, the stress of caring for wounded, dying men eventually also took its toll on the sensitive, moody Olga's nerves. Her sister Maria reported in a letter that Olga broke three panes of a window on a &quot;caprice&quot; with her umbrella on September 5, 1915.;; On another occasion, she destroyed items in a cloakroom when she was &quot;in a rage,&quot; according to the memoirs of Valentina Chebotareva. On October 19, 1915 she was assigned office work at the hospital because she was no longer able to bear the gore of the operating theater.;; She was given arsenic injections in October 1915, at the time considered a treatment for depression or nervous disorders.;; Baroness Sophie Buxhoeveden, one of her mother's ladies in waiting, recalled that Olga had to give up nursing and instead only supervised the hospital wards because she had &quot;overtired herself&quot; and became &quot;nervous and anaemic.&quot;;;

According to the accounts of courtiers, Olga knew the financial and political state of the country during the war and revolution. She reportedly also knew how much the Russian people disliked her mother and father. &quot;She was by nature a thinker,&quot; remembered Gleb Botkin, the son of the family's physician, Yevgeny Botkin, &quot;and as it later seemed to me, understood the general situation better than any member of her family, including even her parents. At least I had the impression that she had little illusions in regard to what the future held in store for them, and in consequence was often sad and worried.&quot;;King and Wilson, p. 46;

Captivity and death
The family was arrested during the Russian Revolution of 1917 and was imprisoned first at their home in Tsarskoye Selo and later at private residences in Tobolsk and Yekaterinburg, Siberia. &quot;Darling, you must know how awful it all is,&quot; Olga wrote in a letter to a friend from Tobolsk.;Kurth, p. xii;

Olga tried to draw comfort from her faith and her proximity to her family. To her &quot;beloved mama&quot;, with whom she had sometimes had a difficult relationship, she wrote a poem in April 1917, while the family was still imprisoned at Tsarskoye Selo: &quot;You are filled with anguish for the sufferings of others. And no one's grief has ever passed you by. You are relentless, only towards yourself, forever cold and pitiless. But if only you could look upon your own sadness from a distance, just once with a loving soul — Oh, how you would pity yourself, how sadly you would weep.&quot;;; In another letter from Tobolsk, Olga wrote: &quot;Father asks to&amp;nbsp;... remember that the evil which is now in the world will become yet more powerful, and that it is not evil which conquers evil, but only love ...&quot;;Christopher, Kurth, and Radzinsky, p. 221.;

A poem copied into one of her notebooks prays for patience and the ability to forgive her enemies:

:&quot;Send us, Lord, the patience, in this year of stormy, gloom-filled days, to suffer popular oppression, and the tortures of our hangmen. Give us strength, oh Lord of justice, Our neighbor's evil to forgive, And the Cross so heavy and bloody, with Your humility to meet, In days when enemies rob us, To bear the shame and humiliation, Christ our Savior, help us. Ruler of the world, God of the universe, Bless us with prayer and give our humble soul rest in this unbearable, dreadful hour. At the threshold of the grave, breathe into the lips of Your slaves inhuman strength — to pray meekly for our enemies.&quot;;Radzinsky, p. 359;

Also found with Olga's effects, reflecting her own determination to remain faithful to the father she adored, was Edmond Rostand's ''L'Aiglon,'' the story of Napoleon Bonaparte's son, who remained loyal to his deposed father until the end of his life.;Radzinsky (1992), p. 359;

There was one report that her father gave Olga a small revolver, which she concealed in a boot while in captivity at Tsarskoe Selo and at Tobolsk. Colonel Eugene Kobylynsky, their sympathetic jailer, pleaded with the grand duchess to surrender her revolver before she, her sisters, and brother were transferred to Yekaterinburg. Olga reluctantly gave up her gun and was left unarmed.;;

The family had been briefly separated in April 1918 when the Bolsheviks moved Nicholas, Alexandra, and Maria to Yekaterinburg. Alexei and the three other young women remained behind because Alexei had suffered another attack of hemophilia. The Empress chose Maria to accompany her because &quot;Olga's spirits were too low&quot; and level-headed Tatiana was needed to take care of Alexei.;Christopher, Kurth, and Radzinsky, p. 180; In May 1918 the remaining children and servants boarded the ship ''Rus'' that ferried them from Tobolsk to Yekaterinburg. Aboard ship, Olga was distressed when she saw one of the guards slip from a ladder and injure his foot. She ran to the man and explained that she had been a nurse during the war and wanted to look at his foot. He refused her offer of treatment. All through the afternoon, Olga fretted over the guard, whom she called &quot;her poor fellow.&quot;;King and Wilson, p. 143; At Tobolsk Olga and her sisters had sewed jewels into their clothing in hopes of hiding them from the Bolsheviks. That night the guards forbade the young women to lock their bedroom doors. Olga, Tatiana, and Anastasia remained fully clothed. Guards looking for the hidden jewels harassed them, having been tipped off by one or more servants in the group. Olga's English tutor, Sydney Gibbes, was haunted to the end of his life by the memory of the grand duchesses' screams and his inability to protect them.;King and Wilson pp. 140–141;
270 px|;From left to right, Grand Duchesses Maria, Olga, Anastasia and Tatiana Nikolaevna in captivity at Tsarskoe Selo in the spring of 1917.

Pierre Gilliard later recalled his last sight of the imperial children at Yekaterinburg:

Olga was reportedly deeply depressed and lost a great deal of weight during her final months. &quot;She was thin, pale, and looked very sick,&quot; recalled one of the guards, Alexander Strekotin, in his memoirs. &quot;She took few walks in the garden, and spent most of her time with her brother.&quot; Another guard recalled that the few times she did walk outside, she stood there &quot;gazing sadly into the distance, making it easy to read her emotions.&quot;;King and Wilson, p. 238; Later, Olga appeared angry with her younger sister Maria for being too friendly to the guards, reported Strekotin.;King and Wilson, p. 246;
;Tsarevich Alexei, left, and Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna in May 1918 aboard the ''Russia'', the ship that ferried them to their deaths at Yekaterinburg. This is the last known photo of Olga and Alexei.
On July 14, 1918, local priests at Yekaterinburg conducted a private church service for the family and reported that Olga and her family, contrary to custom, fell on their knees during the prayer for the dead.;King and Wilson, p. 276; Olga was twenty-two when she was killed with her family at the Ipatiev House in Ekaterinburg on July 17, 1918. The killings were performed by forces of the Bolshevik secret police under Yakov Yurovsky. According to one account, Olga watched her sister Tatiana die before being killed.;King and Wilson, p.303–304;

Several people claimed to be surviving members of the Romanov family following the assassinations. A woman named Marga Boodts claimed to be Grand Duchess Olga. Boodts lived in a villa on Lake Como in Italy and was said to be supported by the former kaiser, Wilhelm II and by the Pope. However, most historians discount her claim and believe Olga died with her family.;Massie, Robert K. ''The Romanovs: The Final Chapter,'' Random House, 1995, ISBN 394-58048-6, p. 147;

Remains later identified through DNA testing as the Romanovs and their servants were discovered in the woods outside Yekaterinburg in 1991. Two bodies, Alexei and one of his sisters, generally thought to be either Maria or Anastasia, were missing. On August 23, 2007, a Russian archaeologist announced the discovery of two burned, partial skeletons at a bonfire site near Yekaterinburg that appeared to match the site described in Yurovsky's memoirs. The archaeologists said the bones are from a boy who was roughly between the ages of ten and thirteen years at the time of his death and of a young woman who was roughly between the ages of eighteen and twenty-three years old. Anastasia was seventeen years, one month old at the time of the assassination, while her sister Maria was nineteen years, one month old and her brother Alexei was two weeks shy of his fourteenth birthday. Olga and Tatiana were twenty-two and twenty-one years old at the time of the assassination. Along with the remains of the two bodies, archaeologists found &quot;shards of a container of sulfuric acid, nails, metal strips from a wooden box, and bullets of various caliber.&quot; The bones were found using metal detectors and metal rods as probes. Tests are still being conducted on the remains to determine whether they are the remains of the two missing Romanov children.;; 

Sainthood
:''For more information, see Romanov sainthood''
In 2000, Olga and her family were canonized as passion bearers by the Russian Orthodox Church. The family had previously been canonized in 1981 by the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad as holy martyrs.

The bodies of Tsar Nicholas II, Tsarina Alexandra, and three of their daughters were finally interred at St. Peter and Paul Cathedral in St. Petersburg on July 17, 1998, eighty years after they were murdered.; ;

Ancestry
;;

Notes


Sources
*Bokhanov, Alexander, Knodt, Dr. Manfred, Oustimenko, Vladimir, Peregudova, Zinaida, Tyutyunnik, Lyubov; trans. Lyudmila Xenofontova. ''The Romanovs: Love, Power, and Tragedy,'' Leppi Publications, 1993, ISBN 0-9521644-0-X
*Buxhoeveden, Baroness Sophie. [http://www.alexanderpalace.org/2006alix/ ''The Life and Tragedy of Alexandra Feodorovna'']
*Christopher, Peter, Kurth, Peter, and Radzinsky, Edvard. ''Tsar: The Lost World of Nicholas and Alexandra'' ISBN 0316507873
*[http://www.alexanderpalace.org/2006pierre/ Gilliard Pierre, Thirteen Years at the Russian Court]
*King, Greg, and Wilson, Penny. ''The Fate of the Romanovs,'' John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2003, ISBN 0-471-20768-3
*Kurth, Peter. ''Anastasia: The Riddle of Anna Anderson,'' Back Bay Books, 1983, ISBN 0-316-50717-2
*Massie, Robert K. ''Nicholas and Alexandra,'' Dell Publishing Co., 1967, ISBN 0440163587
*Massie, Robert K. ''The Romanovs: The Final Chapter,'' Random House, 1995, ISBN 0-394-58048-6
*Maylunas, Andrei, and Mironenko, Sergei, eds.; Galy, Darya, translator. ''A Lifelong Passion: Nicholas and Alexandra: Their Own Story,'' Doubleday, 1997 ISBN 0-385-48673-1
*Radzinsky, Edvard. ''The Last Tsar,'' Doubleday, 1992, ISBN 0-385-42371-3
*Radzinsky, Edvard. ''The Rasputin File,'' Doubleday, 2000, ISBN 0-385-48909-9
*Sullivan, Michael John. ''A Fatal Passion: The Story of the Uncrowned Last Empress of Russia,'' Random House, 1997, ISBN 0-679-42400-8
*Tschebotarioff, Gregory P. ''Russia: My Native Land: A U.S. engineer reminisces and looks at the present,'' McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1964, ASIN 64-21632
*Vorres, Ian. ''The Last Grand Duchess,'' 1965, ASIN B0007E0JK0
*Zeepvat, Charlotte. ''The Camera and the Tsars: A Romanov Family Album,'' Sutton Publishing 2004, ISBN 0-7509-3049-7

External links;
*[http://www.livadia.org/olishka/ Olishka's journal]
*[http://www.livadia.org/trw/olga/ Olga's scrapbook]
*[http://www.alexanderpalace.org/palace/olganbio.html Biography at alexanderpalace.org]
*[http://www.frozentears.org/ FrozenTears.org] A media library of the last Imperial Family.
*[http://www.hemophilia.org/NHFWeb/MainPgs/MainNHF.aspx?menuid=180&amp;contentid=45&amp;rptname=bleeding Hemophilia A (Factor VIII Deficiency)]
*[http://www.struggler.org/GlorificationOfTheRoyalFamily.html The Glorification of the Royal Family]



;




Category:Russian royalty|Olga Nikolaevna of Russia, Grand Duchess
Category:House of Holstein-Gottorp-Romanov|Olga Nikolaevna of Russia, Grand Duchess
Category:Russian nurses|Olga Nikolaievna of Russia, Grand Duchess
Category:Murdered Russian royalty|Olga Nikolaevna of Russia, Grand Duchess
Category:Passion bearers|Olga Nikolaevna of Russia, Grand Duchess
Category:Russian saints|Olga of Russia|Olga Nikolaevna of Russia, Grand Duchess
Category:Eastern Orthodox saints
Category:Women in World War I|Olga Nikilaievena
Category:Deaths by firearm in Russia|Olga Nikolaevna of Russia, Grand Duchess
Category:Female wartime nurses|Olga Nikolaevna of Russia, Grand Duchess
Category:1895 births|Olga Nikolaevna of Russia, Grand Duchess
Category:1918 deaths|Olga Nikolaevna of Russia, Grand Duchess

bg:Олга Николаевна
ca:Olga de Rússia (gran duquessa de Rússia)
de:Olga Nikolajewna Romanowa (1895–1918)
es:Olga Nikolayevna Romanova
fr:Olga Nicolaevna de Russie (1895-1918)
it:Olga Nikolaevna Romanova
hu:Olga Nyikolajevna Romanova orosz nagyhercegnő (1895–1918)
nl:Olga Nikolajevna van Rusland (1895-1918)
ja:オリガ・ニコラエヴナ (ニコライ2世皇女)
pl:Olga Nikołajewna Romanowa
ru:Ольга Николаевна
simple:Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia
sr:Олга Николајевна Романов
fi:Olga Nikolajevna Romanova
sv:Storfurstinnan Olga
vi:Nữ Đại Công tước Olga Nikolaevna của Nga