;
|type = Public
|president = G. Wayne Clough
|city = Atlanta
|state = Georgia (U.S. state)|Georgia
|country = USA
|students = 18,747; ;
|undergrad = 12,570;
|postgrad = 6,177;
|faculty = 900
|endowment = $1.324 billion;(Institute: $276 million; Foundation: $1.047 billion);;
|campus = Urban, 400&amp;nbsp;acres (1.61&amp;nbsp;km²)
|former_names = Georgia School of Technology
|mascot = Buzz, Rambling Wreck
|free_label = Athletics
|free = NCAA Division I. Eight men's varsity teams, seven women's. [http://ramblinwreck.collegesports.com/ Tech Athletics]
|website = [http://www.gatech.edu/ www.gatech.edu]
|colors = White and Old Gold 
}}
The Georgia Institute of Technology, commonly known as Georgia Tech, is a public, coeducational research university, part of the University System of Georgia, and located in Atlanta, Georgia, USA, with wiktionary:Transwiki:Satellite campus|satellite campuses in Savannah, Georgia, Metz, France, Shanghai, China, and Singapore. Georgia Tech is best known for its programs in engineering, computing, and the sciences, though it also offers degrees in architecture, liberal arts, and management.

Established in 1885; and opened in 1888 with the construction of Tech Tower and a shop building,;; Georgia Tech's campus occupies a large part of Midtown Atlanta. Founded as the Georgia School of Technology, it changed its name in 1948 to reflect its evolution from a trade school to a technical institute and research university, and its history and traditions reflect that change.In 1996, it was the site of the athletes' village and a venue for a number of athletic events for the 1996 Summer Olympics.

History

= Establishment=
Atlanta during the Civil War (c. 1864)|right|thumb|300px
The idea of Georgia Institute of Technology was introduced in 1865 during the Reconstruction period. Two former Confederate officers, Major John Fletcher Hanson and Nathaniel Edwin Harris, who had become prominent citizens in the town of Macon, Georgia after the war, strongly believed that the South needed to improve its technology to compete with the industrial revolution that was occurring throughout the North.;;; Many Southerners at this time agreed with this idea. However, because the American South of that era was mainly comprised of agricultural workers and few technical developments were occurring, a technology school was needed.;;

In 1882, prominent Georgians, authorized by the Georgia State Legislature and led by Harris, formed a committee and visited the Northeast to see firsthand how technology schools worked. Using examples from the Worcester County Free Institute of Industrial Science (now Worcester Polytechnic Institute) and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the Atlanta technology school began development on the Worcester Free Institute model, which stressed a combination of &quot;theory and practice,&quot; the &quot;practice&quot; component including student employment and production of consumer items to generate revenue for the school.;;

On October 13, 1885, Georgia Governor Henry D. McDaniel signed the bill to create and fund the new school.;; In 1887, Atlanta pioneer Richard Peters donated four acres of his extensive land holdings to the state;; this land was bounded on the south by North Avenue, and on the west by Cherry Street.; He then sold five adjoining acres of land to the state for $10,000,; approximately equivalent to $182,717.44 in 2006.;; This land was located near the northern city limits of Atlanta at the time of its founding, although the city has now expanded several miles beyond it. A historical marker on the large hill in Georgia Institute of Technology#Central Campus|Central Campus notes that the site occupied by the school's first buildings once held fortifications built to protect Atlanta during the Atlanta Campaign of the American Civil War. The surrender of the city took place on the southwestern boundary of the modern Georgia Tech campus in 1864.;;

= Early years=
An early picture of Georgia Tech
The Georgia School of Technology opened its doors in the fall of 1888 with only two buildings.; One building (now Tech Tower, an administrative headquarters) had classrooms to teach students; The second building featured a shop and had a foundry, forge, boiler room and engine room. It was designed specifically for students to work and produce goods to sell and fund the school. The two buildings were equal in size to show the importance of teaching both the mind and the hands;; though, at the time, there was some disagreement to whether the machine shop should have been used to turn a profit.;

On October 20, 1905, U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt visited the Georgia Tech campus. On the steps of Tech Tower, Roosevelt presented a speech about the importance of technological education.;; He then shook hands with every student.;;

Georgia Tech's Evening School of Commerce began holding classes in 1912.;; The school admitted its first female student in 1917, although the state legislature did not officially authorize attendance by women until 1920.;;; Annie T. Wise became the first female graduate in 1919 and went on to become Georgia Tech's first female faculty member the following year.;; In 1931, the Board of Regents transferred control of the Evening School of Commerce to the University of Georgia (UGA) and moved the civil and electrical engineering courses at UGA to Tech.;; Tech replaced the commerce school with what later became the College of Management. The commerce school would later split from UGA and eventually become Georgia State University.;;;

= Modern history=
Institute President Dr. G. Wayne Clough speaks at a student meeting
Founded as the Georgia School of Technology, it assumed its present name in 1948 to reflect a growing focus on advanced technological and scientific research.;; Unlike similarly-named universities (such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the California Institute of Technology), the Georgia Institute of Technology is a public institution.

The school's first female students were admitted in 1952,;; although women could not enroll in all programs at Tech until 1968. Industrial Engineering was the last program to open to women.;; The first women's dorm, Fulmer Hall, opened in 1969.; Women constituted 28.6% of the undergraduates and 25.8% of the graduate students enrolled in Fall 2006.;; In 1959, a meeting of 2,741 students voted by an overwhelming majority to endorse integration of qualified applicants, regardless of race.;; Three years after the meeting, and one year after the University of Georgia's violent integration,; Georgia Tech became the first university in the Deep South to desegregate without a court order.;
; There was little reaction to this by Tech students; like the city of Atlanta described by former mayor William Hartsfield, they seemed &quot;too busy to hate.&quot;;

John Patrick Crecine was instrumental in securing the 1996 Summer Olympics for Atlanta. A dramatic amount of construction occurred, creating most of what is now considered &quot;West Campus&quot; in order for Tech to serve as the Olympic Village.;; The Undergraduate Living Center, Fourth Street Apartments, Sixth Street Apartments, Eighth Street Apartments, Hemphill Apartments, and Center Street Apartments housed athletes and journalists. The Georgia Tech Aquatic Center was built for swimming events, and the Alexander Memorial Coliseum was renovated.;; The Institute also erected the Kessler Campanile and fountain to serve as a landmark and symbol of the Institute on television broadcasts.; Since then, the Campanile has come to be known by students as &quot;The Shaft.&quot;;;

In 1994, G. Wayne Clough became the first Tech alumnus to serve as the President of the Institute, and was in office during the 1996 Summer Olympics. In 1998, he separated the Ivan Allen College of Management, Policy, and International Affairs into the Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts and returned the College of Management to &quot;College&quot; status (Crecine, the previous president, had demoted Management from &quot;College&quot; to &quot;School&quot; status as part of a controversial 1990 reorganization plan).;;;; His tenure has been focused on a dramatic expansion of the institute, a revamped Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program (UROP), and the creation of an International Plan.;;;;

Academics
The Klaus Advanced Computing Building, named for its benefactor, Chris Klaus
The Microelectronics Research Center
The Centennial Research Building, headquarters to the Georgia Tech Research Institute
= Demographics=
The student body consists of 18,500 graduate and undergraduate students, and more than 900 full-time instructional faculty.;;

Historically, female enrollment at engineering institutions has been quite low and Georgia Tech is no exception. With about twice as many male students as females, Georgia Tech has one of the most unbalanced male-to-female ratios of any co-ed university. However, this is slowly changing presumably due to the university's growing liberal arts programs as well as outreach programs to encourage more female high school students to consider careers in science and engineering, such as the &quot;Women In Engineering&quot; program and also having a chapter of The Society of Women Engineers.;;;; As of Spring 2007, the freshman class of 2006–2007 had a ratio of 68.8% to 31.2%.;; The highest freshman ratio in the past few years (counting only Fall and Spring semesters);A slightly higher percentage of freshmen women attend during Summer. See [http://www.irp.gatech.edu/apps/Enrollment/gender.cfm?TERM=200702&amp;time_status=Total Office of Institutional Research &amp; Planning: Facts and Figures: Enrollment by Gender] for verification.; was Spring 2006, with a ratio of 70.5% to 29.5%.;

= Funding=
The Georgia Institute of Technology is a public institution, receiving funds from the Georgia (U.S. State)|State of Georgia, tuition, fees, research grants, and alumni contributions. In 2006, the Institute's revenue amounted to approximately $879 million, with 27% of that amount from the state, and 12% from tuition and fees.;; Most of the remaining funds were donated by private sources, including the most generous alumni donor base, percentage-wise, of any public university ranked in the top 50.;; The Institute's expenses for 2006 were $860 million; 41% of that figure went to research, 21% to instruction, and 1% to scholarships.;;

= Rankings=
Georgia Tech is consistently ranked well; it has remained in the top ten public universities in the United States for the last nine years.; In 2007, ''U.S. News &amp; World Report'' ranked Tech as the No. 7 public university, and 35th among all universities.; Tech also has the No. 5 undergraduate engineering program, and the No. 4 graduate engineering program.;;; Highly ranked engineering programs include its Schools of Industrial Engineering (1st), Aerospace (2nd), Biomedical (3rd), and Civil Engineering (5th) at the undergraduate level ; and Industrial Engineering (1st) and Biomedical (2nd) at the graduate level.;; ''Diverse Issues in Higher Education'' has ranked Tech No. 1 at the bachelor's level, No. 2 at the master's level, and No. 1 at the doctoral level in terms of producing African American engineering graduates.;

= Colleges=
Georgia Tech's undergraduate and graduate programs are divided into six Colleges. Collaboration among the Colleges is frequent, as mandated by a number of interdisciplinary degree programs and research centers.;; Georgia Tech has sought to strengthen its undergraduate and graduate offerings in less technical fields, primarily those under the Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts. That particular college has seen a 20% increase in admissions.;;

{| style='border:1px solid #dddddd; background-color:#fefefe; padding:3px; margin:0px'
|
*College of Architecture
*College of Management
* College of Liberal Arts
| width='40' |
|
*College of Computing
*College of Engineering
* College of Sciences
|}

= Research=


Georgia Tech is currently classified by The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching as a university with very high research activity.;; Much of this research is funded by large corporations or governmental organizations.;; In addition to research performed by its academic units, Georgia Tech is affiliated with a nonprofit research organization referred to as the Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI).;; GTRI provides sponsored research in a variety of technical specialties including radar, electro-optics, and materials engineering.; Forty percent of Georgia Tech's research, especially Research funding#Government-funded research|government-funded classified work, is conducted through this counterpart organization.; GTRI employs over 1,300 people, conducting over $110 million in research every year.; 

Many startup companies are produced through research conducted at Georgia Tech, with the Advanced Technology Development Center and VentureLab ready to assist Georgia Tech's researchers and entrepreneurs in organization and commercialization. The Georgia Tech Research Corporation serves as the Georgia Tech's contract and technology licensing agency. Georgia Tech is ranked fourth for startup companies, eighth in patents, and eleventh in technology transfer.;;;of space are devoted to research purposes at Georgia Tech and GTRI.; An upcoming addition to that space will be Georgia Tech's Nanotechnology Research Center, scheduled for completion in Summer 2008,;; at which point it will be the largest clean room in the Southeastern United States.

= Industry connections=
Owing to its roots as a trade school, Georgia Tech maintains close ties to the industrial world. Many of these connections are made through Georgia Tech's uniquely popular and robust cooperative education and internship programs. Georgia Tech's Division of Professional Practice (DoPP), established in 1912 as the Georgia Institute of Technology Cooperative Division,;; operates the fourth-oldest cooperative education program in the United States.;; The DoPP is specifically charged with providing opportunities for students to gain real-world employment experience through four programs, each targeting a different body of students. The Undergraduate Cooperative Education Program is a five-year program in which undergraduate students alternate between semesters of formal instruction at Georgia Tech and semesters of full-time employment with their employers. The Graduate Cooperative Education Program, established in 1983, is the largest such program in the United States.;; It allows graduate students pursuing master's degrees or doctorates in any field to spend a maximum of two consecutive semesters working full- or part-time with employers. The Undergraduate Professional Internship Program enables undergraduate students — typically juniors or seniors — to complete a one- or two-semester internship with employers. The Work Abroad Program hosts a variety of cooperative education and internship experiences for upperclassmen and graduate students seeking international employment and cross-cultural experiences. While all four programs are voluntary, they consistently attract high numbers of students — more than 3,000 at last count. Around 1,000 businesses and organizations hire these students, who collectively earn $20 million per year.;

Georgia Tech's cooperative education and internship programs have been externally recognized for their strengths. The Undergraduate Cooperative Education was recognized by ''U.S. News &amp; World Report'' as one of the top 10 &quot;Programs that Really Work&quot; for five consecutive years.;; ''U.S. News &amp; World Report'' additionally ranked Georgia Tech's internship and cooperative education programs among 14 &quot;Academic Programs to Look For&quot; in 2006 and 2007.; On June 4, 2007, the University of Cincinnati inducted Georgia Tech into its Cooperative Education Hall of Honor.;;

Student life
Tech cheerleaders waving flags after a touchdown.
Due to Georgia Tech's location in Midtown Atlanta, Tech students have the social options of the city to choose from, in addition to many Institute-sponsored or Institute-related events.;; In terms of off-campus social options, being located in a city like Atlanta offers a number of options for Tech students. Just off campus, there are several restaurants available to students, especially in Tech Square. &quot;Home Park,&quot; a neighborhood that borders the north end of campus, is a popular living area for Tech students and recent grads,;; and a number of parties and barbecues are hosted by the neighborhood's residents.;;

The Institute's administration has implemented programs to reduce the levels of anxiety felt by many Tech students. Most notable have been the administration's [http://www.faset.gatech.edu FASET] (Familiarization and Adaptation to the Surroundings and Environs of Tech) and Freshman Experience (a freshman-only dorm life program to &quot;encourage friendships and a feeling of social involvement&quot;) programs, which help to acclimate new students to their surroundings and foster a greater sense of community.;; As a result, the Institute's retention rates have improved.;;

= Traditions=
A closeup of Tech Tower


Tech has a number of legends and traditions, some of which have persisted for decades. Some are well-known; for example, the most notable of these is the popular but rare tradition of stealing the 'T' from Tech Tower. Tech Tower, Tech's historic primary administrative building, has the letters TECH hanging atop it on each of its four sides. A number of times, students have orchestrated complex plans to steal the huge symbolic letter T, and on occasion have carried this act out successfully. The latest instance of this tradition occurred in October 2005, when a replica of the T was stolen from the Student Services Building and returned two days later.;; One of the cherished holdovers from Tech's early years, a steam whistle blows five minutes before the hour, every hour from 7:55 a.m. to 5:55 p.m.;; It is for that reason that the faculty newspaper is named ''The Whistle''.;

Georgia Tech holds a heated, long and ongoing rivalry with the University of Georgia, known as Clean, Old-Fashioned Hate. The first known hostilities between the two institutions trace back to 1891. The University of Georgia's literary magazine proclaimed UGA's colors to be &quot;old gold, black, and crimson.&quot; Dr. Charles H. Herty, the first UGA football coach, felt that old gold was too similar to yellow and that it &quot;symbolized cowardice.&quot; After the 1893 football game against Tech, Herty removed old gold as an official color.;; Tech would first use old gold for their uniforms, as a proverbial slap in the face to UGA, in their first unofficial football game against Auburn in 1891.;; Georgia Tech's school colors would henceforth be old gold and white.

= Arts at Tech=
The Robert Ferst Center for the Arts
Founded in 1906, the Glee Club was one of the first student organizations on campus, and still operates today.;;;; The Glee Club was among the first collegiate choral groups to release a recording of their songs. The group has toured extensively and appeared on ''The Ed Sullivan Show'' twice, providing worldwide exposure to &quot;Ramblin' Wreck from Georgia Tech.&quot;;;Since its inception, the all-male Glee Club has split to form the Chorale and Chamber Choir, both mixed groups.

The Georgia Tech Athletic Bands play a noticeable part for school spirit and athletic support.;; It was founded in 1908 by 14 Students and Robert &quot;Biddy&quot; Bidez.; The Marching Band consistently fields over 300 members and even invites students from other Atlanta universities who do not have football programs (Georgia State, Emory, Agnes Scott, Kennesaw State, etc) to participate. Members of the marching band travel to every football game. Since its inception in 1996,; the [http://harmony.gatech.edu/orchestra/ Georgia Tech Symphony Orchestra] has grown from a dozen interested students into an 80+ member ensemble. It is now one of the largest performance groups on campus.

In 1963 the [http://www.coa.gatech.edu/music/ Music Department], under the leadership of Ben Logan Sisk, was created within Tech's General College. In 1976 the Music department was assigned to the College of Sciences &amp; Liberal Studies, and in 1991 was relocated to its current home in the College of Architecture. Under the Couch is a live music venue located beneath the Couch Building on West Campus. It is run by the Musician's Network. Georgia Tech also has a growing music scene, including the growing a cappella groups on campus: Nothin' but Treble,;; Sympathetic Vibrations,;; and Infinite Harmony.;;

Many music, theatre, dance, and opera performances are held in the Ferst Center for the Arts.;; DramaTech is the campus' student-run theater. The theater has been entertaining Georgia Tech and the surrounding community since 1947. They are also home to Let's Try This! (the campus improv troupe) and VarietyTech (a song and dance troupe). Momocon is an annual anime/gaming/comics convention held on campus in March hosted by Anime O-Tekku, the Georgia Tech anime club. It is free admission and usually held in the Student Center and Instructional Center, as well as outdoor areas.;;

= Student media=
The front page of the first issue of ''The Technique''.
WREK, 91.1 MHz is known as &quot;Wreck Radio.&quot; The studio is on the second floor of the Student Center Commons. Broadcasting with 40&amp;nbsp;kW ERP, WREK is among the nation's most powerful college radio stations.WREK is currently a student operated and run radio station, but there is currently a debate (as of April 2007) as to whether or not NPR or GPB should be given control over some of the station's airtime.;; Many students are opposed to such a change.;;

''The Technique'', also known as the &quot;''Nique'',&quot; is Tech's official student newspaper. It is distributed weekly during the Fall and Spring semesters (on Fridays), and biweekly during the Summer semester (with certain exceptions). It was established on November 17, 1911. ''The Blueprint'' is Tech's yearbook, established in 1908. Other student publications include ''The North Avenue Review'', Tech's &quot;free-speech magazine,&quot;;; and ''Erato'', Tech's literary magazine.;; The offices of all student publications are located in the Student Services Building.

= Campus services=
Georgia Tech Cable Network, or GTCN, is the college's branded cable source. The station broadcasts WREK-FM on channel 17, in addition to student-generated content and recent movies on channels 20 and 21. Most non-original programming is obtained from Dish Network. GTCN currently has 109 Standard-definition television|standard-definition channels and five high-definition television|high-definition channels.;;

The Office of Information Technology, or OIT, manages most of the Institute's computing resources (and some related services such as campus telephones). With the exception of a few computer labs maintained by individual Georgia Institute of Technology#Colleges|colleges, OIT is responsible for most of the computing facilities on campus. Student, faculty, and staff e-mail accounts are among its services.;; 

ResNet provides free technical support to all students and guests living in Georgia Tech's on-campus housing (excluding fraternities and sororities). ResNet is responsible for network, telephone, and television service, and most support is provided by part-time student employees.;; 

Campuses
Georgia Tech's East Campus and Central Campus as seen from an elevated point near Peachtree Street and North Avenue. Bobby Dodd Stadium is in the foreground, Tech Tower and Junior's Grill are in the background to the left, and the Georgia Tech Aquatic Center is in the background and to the right. The Varsity is directly behind the viewer.

A view of the Burger Bowl, facing south.
The Georgia Tech campus is located in Midtown, an area north of downtown Atlanta. Although a number of skyscrapers — most visibly the headquarters of AT&amp;T Midtown Center|AT&amp;T, Coca-Cola headquarters|The Coca-Cola Company, and Bank of America —are visible from all points on campus, the campus itself has few buildings over four stories and has a great deal of greenery. This gives it a distinctly suburban atmosphere quite different from other Atlanta campuses such as that of Georgia State University.;;;;

The campus is organized into four main parts: West Campus, East Campus, Central Campus, and Technology Square. West Campus and East Campus are both occupied primarily by student living complexes, while Central Campus is reserved primarily for teaching and research buildings.;

= West Campus=
Eighth Street Apartments East Building
West Campus is occupied primarily by apartments and coed undergraduate dormitories. Prominent apartments include Hemphill, Center Street, 6th Street, Maulding, Undergraduate Living Center (ULC), and Eighth Street Apartments. Prominent dorms include Freeman, Montag, Fitten, Folk, Caldwell, Armstrong, Hefner, Fulmer, and Woodruff Suites. The Campus Recreation Center (formerly the Student Athletic Complex); a volleyball court; a large, low natural green area known as the Burger Bowl; and a flat artificial green area known as the SAC Fields are all located on the western side of the campus. Also within easy walking distance of West Campus is City Cafe, which is open 24 hours, Rocky Mountain Pizza, and Engineer's Bookstore, an alternative to Georgia Tech's official bookstore. West Campus is also home to a music club operated by students called Under the Couch as well as a small diner and convenience store, West Side Market. Due to limited space, all auto travel proceeds via a network of one-way streets which connects West Campus to Ferst Drive, the main road of the campus. Woodruff Dining Hall, or &quot;Woody's,&quot; is the West Campus Dining Hall. It connects the Woodruff North and Woodruff South undergraduate dorms.

= East Campus=
A view of Skiles Walkway from the Student Center, facing east.
East Campus houses all of the fraternities and sororities as well as most of the undergraduate freshman dormitories. Although the residences are similar, East Campus is decidedly more urban than West Campus. East Campus abuts on the Downtown Connector, granting residences quick access to Midtown and its businesses (for example, The Varsity) via a number of bridges over the highway as well as a tunnel beneath it. Georgia Tech football's home, Bobby Dodd Stadium is located on East Campus, as well as Georgia Tech basketball's home Alexander Memorial Coliseum. Brittain Dining Hall is the main dining hall for East Campus. It is modeled after a medieval church, complete with carved columns and stained glass windows showing symbolic figures. The main road leading from East Campus to Central Campus is an ascending incline commonly known as &quot;Freshman Hill&quot; (in reference to the large number of freshman dorms near its foot) or simply &quot;The Hill.&quot; On March 8, 2007, the former Georgia State University Village apartments were transferred to Georgia Tech, and began housing students in the fall semester of 2007.;;

= Central Campus=

A view of central campus from the student center, facing northeast.
Central Campus is home to the majority of the academic, research, and administrative buildings. The Central Campus includes, among others: the Howey Physics Building; the Boggs Chemistry Building; the College of Computing; the Klaus Advanced Computing Building; the Skiles Classroom Building, which houses the School of Mathematics and the School of Literature, Communication and Culture; the D. M. Smith Building, which houses the School of Public Policy and the School of History, Technology, and Society; and the Ford Environmental Science &amp; Technology Building. In 2005, the School of Modern Languages returned to the Swann Building, a 100-year-old former dormitory that now houses some of the most technology-equipped classrooms on campus. Intermingled with these are a variety of research facilities, such as the Centennial Research Building, the Microelectronics Research Center, the Nanotechnology Research Center, and the Petit Biotechnology Building.

Tech's administrative buildings, such as the Student Services Building (&quot;Flag Building&quot;), Tech Tower, and the Bursar's Office, are also located on the Central Campus, in the recently-renovated Georgia Tech Historic District.;; The campus library, plus a small traditional eatery called Junior's Grill, as well as a large communal building for students, the Fred B. Wenn Student Center (a student union), are also located on Central Campus. The Student Center provides a variety of recreational and social functions for students including: a computer lab, a game room (&quot;Tech Rec&quot;),;; the Student Post Office, a darkened Music Listening Room, a movie theater, the Food Court, plus meeting rooms for various clubs and organizations. Adjacent to the eastern entrance of the Student Center is the Kessler Campanile (which is referred to by students as &quot;The Shaft&quot;). The former Hightower Textile Engineering building was demolished in 2002 to create Yellow Jacket Park. More greenspace now occupies the area around the Kessler Campanile for a more aesthetically pleasing look, in accordance with the official Campus Master Plan.;; Numerous clubs and organizations hold activities in Yellow Jacket Park.

= Technology Square=
A view of Technology Square, facing south

Technology Square, also known as &quot;Tech Square,&quot; is located across the Downtown Connector and embedded in the city east of East Campus. It is home to the College of Management, the official Institute bookstore, the Georgia Tech Hotel and Conference Center.

Buildings in Tech Square also serve as offices for a number of faculty and graduate students, the GVU Center, the Georgia Tech Enterprise Innovation Institute, the Advanced Technology Development Center, VentureLab, and the Georgia Electronics Design Center. The buildings in Technology Square also host a variety of small restaurants and businesses, as well as business ventures spawned by Georgia Tech research. Opened in 2003, the district was built over run-down neighborhoods and has sparked a revitalization of the entire Midtown area.

= Satellite campuses=
Georgia Tech Lorraine

In 1999, Georgia Tech began offering local degree programs to engineering students in Southeast Georgia, and in 2003 established a physical campus in Savannah, Georgia. Georgia Tech Savannah offers undergraduate and graduate programs in engineering, and boasts a robust research program with many activities centered on coastal concerns. It is also home to the regional offices of the Georgia Tech Economic Development Institute and the Advanced Technology Development Center. The Georgia Tech Savannah campus offers engineering programs in conjunction with Georgia Southern University, South Georgia College, Armstrong Atlantic State University, and Savannah State University.;; The university further collaborated with the National University of Singapore to set up [http://www.tliap.nus.edu.sg The Logistics Institute - Asia Pacific] in Singapore.;

Georgia Tech also operates a campus in Metz, in northeastern France, known as Georgia Tech Lorraine. Opened in October 1990,;; It offers Masters' level courses in Electrical and Computer Engineering, Computer Science and Mechanical Engineering and Ph.D. in Electrical and Computer Engineering and Mechanical Engineering. Georgia Tech Lorraine is known for a much-publicized lawsuit pertaining to the language used in advertisements; ''see Toubon Law#The Georgia Tech Lorraine case|Toubon Law''. Additionally, the College of Architecture maintains a small permanent presence in Paris, France in affiliation with the École nationale supérieure d'architecture de Paris-La Villette|École d'architecture de Paris-La Villette. There are plans to start a research and graduate education center in Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India.;;;;

Athletics
Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets logo

Georgia Tech's sports teams are variously called the ''Yellow jackets'', the ''Ramblin' Wreck'', and the ''Engineers'', but the official nickname is ''Yellow Jackets''. They participate in NCAA Division I within the Atlantic Coast Conference. The college was a charter member of the Southeastern Conference, and played in that league until 1964.The Institute mascots are Buzz and the Ramblin' Wreck. The Institute's traditional football rival is the University of Georgia; the rivalry was, at one time, considered one of the fiercest in college football. The rivalry is commonly referred to as Clean, Old-Fashioned Hate, which is also the title of a book about the subject.;; Tech has seventeen varsity sports: Men's Football, Men's and Women's Basketball, Men's Baseball, Women's Softball, Women's volleyball, Men's Golf, Men's and Women's Tennis, Men's and Women's Swimming and Diving, Men's and Women's Track and Field, and Men's and Women's Cross Country.Four Georgia Tech Football teams were selected as national champions in news polls: 1917, 1928, 1952, and 1990.In May 2007, the 2006-07 Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets women's tennis team|women's tennis team won the NCAA National Championship with a 4-2 victory over UCLA, the first ever national title granted by the NCAA to Tech.;;;;


= Fight Song=
Bobby Dodd Stadium at Historic Grant Field, home of the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets football team.
Alexander Memorial Coliseum, home of the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets basketball team.

Tech's fight song &quot;I'm a Ramblin' Wreck from Georgia Tech&quot; is known worldwide. First published in the 1908 Blueprint,;; it was adapted from an old drinking song (&quot;Son of a Gambolier&quot;),; and embellished with trumpet flourishes by Frank Roman.;; Then-Vice President Richard Nixon and Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev sang the song together when they met in Moscow in 1958 to reduce the tension between them.;;; As the story goes, Nixon didn't know any Russian songs, but Khrushchev knew that one American one as it had been sung on The Ed Sullivan Show.; 

''I'm a Ramblin' Wreck'' has had many other notable moments in its history, including being the first school song played in space.;; Gregory Peck sang the song while strumming a ukulele in the movie ''The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit''. John Wayne whistled it in ''The High and the Mighty''.Tim Holt's character sings a few bars of it in the movie ''His Kind of Woman''. There are numerous stories of commanding officers in Higgins boats crossing the English Channel on the morning of D-Day leading their men in the song to calm their nerves.; It is played after every Georgia Tech score in a football game.

Another popular fight song is ''Up with the White and Gold'', which is usually played by the band preceding ''Ramblin' Wreck''.

= Club sports=
Georgia Tech participates in many non-NCAA sanctioned club sports. These sports include and are not limited to crew, cricket, cycling (winning three consecutive Dirty South Collegiate Cycling Conference mountain bike championships), Horse#Horses in sport today|equestrian, fencing, field hockey, gymnastics, ice hockey, kayaking, lacrosse, paintball, roller hockey, soccer, rowing, rugby union, sailing, skydiving, triathlon, ultimate, water polo, water ski, and Men's varsity wrestling. Many club sports take place at the Georgia Tech Aquatic Center, where swimming, diving, water polo, and the swimming portion of the Modern Pentathlon competitions for the 1996 Summer Olympics were held.;;

Alumni

Georgia Tech's first two graduates were H.L. Smith (top row, center) and G.C. Crawford (top row, far right).
There are many notable graduates, non-graduate former students and current students of Georgia Tech. Georgia Tech alumni are generally known as Yellow Jackets. According to the Georgia Tech Alumni Association,;;


The first class of 95 students entered Georgia Tech in 1888,;; and the first two graduates received their degrees in 1890.;; Since then, the institute has greatly expanded, with an enrollment of 12,526 undergraduates and 6,128 postgraduate students as of Fall 2007.;;

Many distinguished individuals once called Georgia Tech home. The most notable alumnus is probably Jimmy Carter, former President of the United States and Nobel Peace Prize winner, who briefly attended Georgia Tech in the early 1940s prior to matriculating at and graduating from the United States Naval Academy.;; Another Georgia Tech graduate and Nobel Prize winner, Kary Mullis, received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1993. A large number of businesspeople (CEOs, directors, etc.) began their careers at the College of Management. Some of the most successful of these are Charles &quot;Garry&quot; Betty (CEO Earthlink), David Dorman (CEO AT&amp;T Corporation), Mike Duke (CEO Wal-Mart), and James D. Robinson III (CEO American Express and later director of The Coca-Cola Company).

Tech graduates have been deeply influential in politics, military service, and activism. Atlanta mayor Ivan Allen Jr.|Ivan Allen, Jr. and former United States Senator Sam Nunn have both made significant changes from within their elected offices. Current Georgia Tech president G. Wayne Clough was also a Tech grad, the first Tech alumnus to serve in that position. Many notable military commanders are alumni; William L. Ball was the 67th Secretary of the Navy, John M. Brown III is the Commander of the United States Army Pacific Command, and Leonard Wood was a Medal of Honor winner for helping capture of the Apache chief Geronimo.;; Wood was also Tech's first football coach and (simultaneously) the team captain, and was instrumental in Tech's first-ever football victory in a game against the University of Georgia.;

Numerous astronauts and NASA administrators spent time at Tech; most notably, Retired Vice Admiral Richard H. Truly was the eighth administrator of NASA, and later served as the president of GTRI. John Young was the first commander of the space shuttle and is the only person to have piloted four different classes of spacecraft. Georgia Tech has its fair share of noteworthy engineers, scientists, and inventors. Kary Mullis developed the polymerase chain reaction, Herbert Saffir developed the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale, and W. Jason Morgan made significant contributions to the theory of plate tectonics and geodynamics. In computer science, Krishna Bharat developed Google News, D. Richard Hipp developed SQLite, and Chaim Gingold and Mike Pinkerton have contributed to Spore and Mozilla, respectively. Architect Michael Arad designed the World Trade Center Memorial in New York City, and John Portman designed several buildings across the globe, including Atlanta's SunTrust Plaza.

Despite their highly technical backgrounds, Tech graduates are no strangers to the arts or athletic competition. Comedian/actor Jeff Foxworthy of Blue Collar Comedy Tour fame, Mark Lee of Third Day, John Salley of The Best Damn Sports Show Period, and Randolph Scott all called Tech home. ;Several famous athletes have, as well; approximately 150 Tech students have gone into the NFL, with many others going into the NBA or MLB. Well-known American football athletes include former students Calvin Johnson, Reggie Ball, Keith Brooking, and Ken Whisenhunt, former Tech head football coaches Pepper Rodgers and Bill Fulcher, and all-time greats such as Joe Hamilton, Pat Swilling, Billy Shaw, and Joe Guyon. Tech's entrants into the NBA include Jarrett Jack, Luke Schenscher, Stephon Marbury, Mark Price, and Chris Bosh. Award-winning baseball stars include Mark Teixeira, Nomar Garciaparra, and Jason Varitek. In golf, the legendary Bobby Jones founded The Masters, David Duval was ranked #1 in the world in 2001, and Stewart Cink was ranked in the top ten.

References


External links

*[http://www.gatech.edu/ Georgia Tech website]
*[http://www.gatech.edu/directories.php Georgia Tech Directory]

*[http://gtalumni.org/campusmap/ Official Campus Map]





Category:Atlanta metropolitan area
Category:Atlanta, Georgia
Category:Educational institutions established in 1885
Category:Georgia Institute of Technology|*
Category:Oak Ridge Associated Universities
Category:Southern Association of Colleges and Schools
Category:Technical universities and colleges
Category:Universities and colleges in Georgia (U.S. state)

de:Georgia Institute of Technology
es:Instituto Tecnológico de Georgia
fa:انستیتو تکنولوژی جورجیا
fr:Georgia Institute of Technology
ko:조지아 공과대학교
it:Georgia Institute of Technology
nl:Georgia Institute of Technology
ja:ジョージア工科大学
simple:Georgia Institute of Technology
th:สถาบันเทคโนโลยีจอร์เจีย
tr:Georgia Teknoloji Enstitüsü
zh:佐治亚理工学院