

 | language = English
 | preceded_by= ''Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl''
 | followed_by= ''Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End''
 | gross = $1,066,200,651
 | amg_id = 1:319315 
 | imdb_id= 0383574}}
''Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest'' is a 2006 adventure film of the ''Pirates of the Caribbean'' series, the sequel to the 2003 film ''Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl''. The film was directed by Gore Verbinski, written by Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio, and produced by Jerry Bruckheimer. 

The story picks up from where the first film left off when Captain Jack Sparrow (Johnny Depp)discovers his debt to the villainous Davy Jones (Bill Nighy) is due, while Will Turner (Orlando Bloom) and Elizabeth Swann (Keira Knightley) are arrested by Lord Cutler Beckett (Tom Hollander) for helping Jack Sparrow escape execution. 

The film was shot back-to-back with Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End|the third film during 2005, and was released in Australia and the United Kingdom on July 6, 2006, and in the United States and Canada on July 7, 2006. The film received mixed reviews, with praise for its special effects and criticism for its complex story and lengthy running time. Despite this, ''Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest'' set several records in its first three days, with an opening weekend of $136 million in the United States, and became the third movie to gross over $1 billion in the worldwide box office, behind ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (film)| The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' and ''Titanic''.
Plot
;

The East India Trading Company arrives in Port Royal, Jamaica to extend its monopoly in the Caribbean and purge piracy. Leading the expansion is Lord Cutler Beckett, a powerful and ruthless EITC agent who arrests Elizabeth Swann and Will Turner shortly before their wedding. Beckett threatens to execute them and the absent ex-Commodore James Norrington for aiding Captain Jack Sparrow's escape, but he offers clemency if Will agrees to search for Sparrow and his magical compass which points to what someone wants most.An informant in Tortuga leads Will to the ''Black Pearl'' run aground on Pelegosto, a cannibal-inhabited island where Jack and his crew are captive. Jack hid there after he was visited by his former crewmate, William &quot;Bootstrap Bill&quot; Turner|&quot;Bootstrap Bill&quot; Turner, who is now an indentured sailor aboard Captain Davy Jones' ghost ship, the ''Flying Dutchman''. Bootstrap delivers Jack the Black Spot, a mark that signifies his debt to Jones is due. Thirteen years before, Jones raised the ''Black Pearl'' from the ocean depths and made Jack its captain. In exchange, Jack must now serve aboard the ''Flying Dutchman'' for 100 years.

Jack becomes a native god on Pelegosto
Will, Jack, and the crew escape their Pelegosto captors, unexpectedly recruiting Pintel and Ragetti as they are attempting to commandeer the ''Black Pearl'', and head for sea. Jack has been searching for a key that leads to limitless wealth, but his magical compass has failed. He agrees to give Will the compass if he helps him find a key and what it unlocks. Seeking assistance from Tia Dalma, a voodoo priestess, Jack learns the compass will not work because he does not know what he truly wants, or is unable to claim it as his own. The key, Tia tells him, unlocks the Dead Man's Chest containing Davy Jones' beating heart. When the pain of lost love became too much to bear, Jones carved the heart from his chest, burying it in a secret location. Whoever possesses the heart controls Davy Jones, thereby controlling the world's oceans. Back at sea, the ''Flying Dutchman'' encounters Sparrow, who deviously attempts to barter Will in exchange for himself. Jones demands 99 souls within three days for Jack's freedom and keeps Will as a &quot;good faith payment&quot;. 

In Port Royal, Governor Weatherby Swann frees Elizabeth. Confronting Beckett at gunpoint, she forces him to validate a Letter of Marque&amp;mdash;a royal document with which Beckett intends to recruit Sparrow as a privateer, and which Elizabeth wants for Will. Stowing away on a merchant vessel, Elizabeth lands in Geography of Pirates of the Caribbean#Tortuga|Tortuga where she finds Jack and Gibbs desperately recruiting unsuspecting sailors in a pub to pay off his debt. A disheveled Norrington also applies. Blaming Sparrow for his ruin, he tries to shoot the captain and ignites a brawl. Elizabeth knocks him out to save him from the angry mob. At the pier, Jack reveals the compass' secret to Elizabeth; it points to what the holder wants most in the world. When he convinces her that she can save Will by finding the chest, she gets a bearing. Once the ship is underway, an attraction arises between Jack and Elizabeth.

On Geography of Pirates of the Caribbean#Isla Cruces|Isla Cruces, Jack, Norrington, and Elizabeth find the Dead Man's Chest. Will, who has escaped the ''Flying Dutchman'' with help from his father, Bootstrap Bill, arrives with the key that he stole from Davy Jones. Will wants to stab the heart to free his father, but Jack cannot allow that in fear of the Kraken being uncontrollable if Jones is dead, and Norrington desires it to give to Lord Beckett as a way of regaining his rank as well as using Elizabeth's Letters of Marque.The three, each desperate to gain the chest, begin a three-way duel; the arrival of Jones' crew and Pintel and Ragetti's attempt to make off with the chest further complicate matters. Norrington ultimately escapes with the heart and the Letters of Marque while Jones' crewmembers retrieve the now-empty Dead Man's Chest. 

Jack battles the Kraken

The ''Flying Dutchman'' pursues the ''Black Pearl'', but with the wind behind them, the ''Black Pearl'' outruns her. Jones ends the pursuit and instead summons the Kraken. In a moment of cowardice, or perhaps in an attempt to retrieve the heart of Davy Jones, Jack abandons the ''Black Pearl'' in a longboat and starts rowing back to Isla Cruces; but unable to desert his crew, he returns in time to save them. He gives the order to abandon ship before the Kraken makes its final assault. ‎Realizing the Kraken is only hunting Jack, a deceptive Elizabeth passionately kisses him while handcuffing him to the mast. Racked with guilt over her betrayal, she tells the others Jack chose to remain behind, unaware that Will saw the kiss and now believes she loves Sparrow. Freeing himself from the shackles, Jack charges the Kraken; the colossal beast drags him and the ''Black Pearl'' to a watery grave.

Watching from his ship, Davy Jones declares their debt settled, although he soon discovers the chest is empty. Norrington, meanwhile, makes his way to Port Royal and delivers the heart and the Letters of Marque to Cutler Beckett in a bid to regain his career. Elizabeth, Will, and the surviving ''Black Pearl'' crew seek refuge with Tia Dalma. She asks if they would be willing to save Jack from Davy Jones' Locker. When all say, &quot;Aye,&quot; Tia Dalma sends the crew on their next journey to World's End to rescue Jack with a captain who knows those waters — Captain Barbossa.

Cast
*Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow: Captain of the ''Black Pearl''.He is hunted by the Kraken because of his unpaid blood debt to Davy Jones. He is searching for the Dead Man's Chest to free himself from Jones' servitude.
*Orlando Bloom as Will Turner: A blacksmith turned pirate who strikes a deal with Cutler Beckett to find Jack Sparrow and his compass so he can save himself and his fiancée Elizabeth from execution. Later he is reunited with and seeks to free his father, who owes a lifetime of service to Davy Jones.
*Keira Knightley as Elizabeth Swann: Governor Swann's daughter and Will's fiancée, who is arrested on her wedding day for helping Jack Sparrow escape. Escaping jail with help from her father, she meets up with Jack in Tortuga and joins his crew to search for Will and the chest. 
*Bill Nighy as Davy Jones: Captain of the ''Flying Dutchman''.The main antagonist, Davy Jones was human long ago. Unable to bear the pain of losing his true love, he carved out his heart and put it into the Dead Man's Chest, then buried it in a secret location. He has become a bizarre creature &amp;mdash; part octopus, part crab, part man &amp;mdash; and collects the souls of dead or dying sailors to serve aboard his ship for one hundred years.
*Jack Davenport as James Norrington: He resigned his commission as Commodore in the Royal Navy after losing his ship and crew in a hurricane in the pursuit of Jack Sparrow. Fallen on hard times and into alcoholism, he joins the ''Black Pearl's'' crew and seeks to regain his honor and career.
*Stellan Skarsgård as William &quot;Bootstrap Bill&quot; Turner|&quot;Bootstrap Bill&quot; Turner: A crewman aboard the Flying Dutchman and Will Turner's father. He was cursed by the Aztec gold on Geography of Pirates of the Caribbean#Isla de Muerta|Isla de Muerta. Thrown overboard after refusing to take part in the mutiny against Jack led by Barbossa, he spent years bound to a cannon beneath the crushing ocean. Found by Davy Jones, he swore to the ''Flying Dutchman'' crew and escaped death.
*Kevin McNally as Joshamee Gibbs: The ''Black Pearl's'' first mate and Jack's loyal friend, he once served in the Royal Navy under Lieutenant James Norrington.
*Tom Hollander as Lord Cutler Beckett: Chairman of the East India Trading Company, he travels to Port Royal to capture and recruit Jack Sparrow as a privateer. What he really desires is Davy Jones' heart, with which he can rule the seas with Jones' commanded servitude.
*Lee Arenberg as Pintel: A pirate and former ''Black Pearl'' crewmember under Captain Barbossa. He was imprisoned after the Aztec curse was broken, but escapes to rejoin Jack Sparrow's ''Black Pearl'' crew.
*Mackenzie Crook as Ragetti: Pintel's inseparable crewmate. He has a wooden eye, and despite being illiterate, has begun &quot;reading&quot; the Bible, saying that you get credit for trying.
*Naomie Harris as Tia Dalma: A voodoo priestess who bartered Jack Sparrow his magic compass. She explains the legend of Davy Jones and owns a similar locket to his. She also reveals to the crew when they return to her shack after the Kraken takes down the Pearl that there is a way they can save Jack and Hector Barbossa is alive.
*Jonathan Pryce as Governor Weatherby Swann. Elizabeth's father and governor of Port Royal. He adores his daughter but puts little faith in Will and does not consider him the best match for Elizabeth.

Production
Following the success of ''Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl'' (2003), the cast and crew signed on for two more sequels to be shot back-to-back,;; a practical decision on Disney's part to allow more time with the same cast and crew.;; Writer Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio decided not to make the sequels new adventures featuring the same characters, as with the ''Indiana Jones'' and ''James Bond'' series, but to retroactively turn ''The Curse of the Black Pearl'' into the first of a trilogy.;; They wanted to explore the reality of what would happen after Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann's embrace at the end of the first film, and initially considered the Fountain of Youth as the plot device.;; They settled on introducing Davy Jones, the ''Flying Dutchman'' and the Kraken, a mythology only mentioned once in the first film. They also introduced the historical East India Trading Company, who for them represented a counterpoint to the themes of personal freedom represented by pirates.;;

Planning on the film began in June 2004, and production was much larger than ''The Curse of the Black Pearl'', which was only shot on location in St. Vincent.;; This time, the sequels would require fully working ships, with a working ''Black Pearl'' built over the body of an oil tanker in Bayou La Batre, Alabama. By November, the script was still unfinished as the writers did not want director Gore Verbinski and producer Jerry Bruckheimer to compromise what they had written, so Verbinski worked with James Byrkit to storyboard major sequences without need of a script, while Elliott and Rossio wrote a &quot;preparatory&quot; script for the crew to use before they finished the script they were happy with. By January 2005, with rising costs and no script, Disney threatened to cancel the film, but changed their minds. The writers would accompany the crew on location, feeling that the lateness of their rewrites would improve the spontaneity of the cast's performances.; 

=Filming=

The two bone cages used in one of the opening scenes of the film. The cages are now located on an attraction at Disney's Hollywood Studios.
Filming for ''Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest'' began on February 28 2005,; in Palos Verdes, beginning with Elizabeth's ruined wedding day.; The crew spent the first shooting days at Walt Disney Studios in Los Angeles, including the interiors of the ''Black Pearl'' and the ''Edinburgh Trader'' which Elizabeth stows away on,;; before moving to St. Vincent to shoot the scenes in Port Royal and Tortuga. Sets from the previous film were reused, having survived three hurricanes, although the main pier had to be rebuilt as it had collapsed in November. The crew had four tall ships at their disposal to populate the backgrounds, which were painted differently on each side for economy.; One of the ships used was the replica of the HMS ''Bounty'' used in the 1962 film adaptation of ''Mutiny on the Bounty''.;''Brando's bounty's sailing in.'' Bristol Evening Post. Pg. 6. July 5, 2007.;;''Logsdon rows to the occasion.'' Matthew Horn Matthew Horn News Herald Pg.1 (Port Clinton, Ohio). June 26, 2007.; 

On April 18 2005,;; the crew began shooting at Dominica, a location Verbinski had selected as he felt it fitted the sense of remoteness he was looking for.; That was exactly the problem during production: the undeveloped Dominican government were completely unprepared for the scale of a Hollywood production, with the 500-strong crew occupying around 90% of the roads on the island and having trouble moving around on the undeveloped roads. The weather also alternated between torrential rainstorms and hot temperatures, the latter of which was made worse for the cast who had to wear period clothing. At Dominica, the sequences involving the Pelegosto and the forest segment of the battle on Isla Cruces were shot. Verbinski preferred to use practical props for the giant wheel and bone cage sequences, feeling long close-up shots would help further suspend the audience's disbelief.; Dominica was also used for Tia Dalma's shack. Filming on the island concluded on May 26 2005.;;

The crew moved to a small island called White Cay in the Bahamas for the beginning and end of the Isla Cruces battle,; before production took a break until August, where in Los Angeles the interiors of the ''Flying Dutchman'' were shot.;; On September 18 2005,;; the crew moved to Grand Bahama Island to shoot ship exteriors, including the working ''Black Pearl'' and ''Flying Dutchman''. Filming there was a tumultuous period, starting with the fact that the tank had not actually been finished. The hurricane season caused many pauses in shooting, and Hurricane Wilma damaged many of the accessways and pumps, though no one was hurt nor were any of the ships destroyed.; Filming of the second film was completed on February 7 2006.;;

=Special effects=
From reel to reality: Davy Jones is brought to life.
The ''Flying Dutchmans crew were originally conceived by writers Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio as ghosts, but Gore Verbinski disliked this and designed them as physical creatures.;; Their hierarchy is reflected by how mutated they were: newcomers had low level infections which resemble rosacea, while the most mutated had full-blown undersea creature attributes. Verbinski wanted to keep them realistic, rejecting a character with a turtle shell, and the animators watched various David Attenborough documentaries to study the movement of sea anemones and mussels.;; All of the crew are computer-generated, with the exception of Stellan Skarsgård, who played &quot;Bootstrap&quot; Bill Turner. Initially his prosthetics would be augmented with CGI but that was abandoned.;; Skarsgård spent four hours in the make-up chair and was dubbed &quot;Bouillabaisse&quot; on set.;;

Captain Davy Jones himself had originally been designed with chin growths, before the designers made the move to full-blown tentacles;;; the skin of the character is based on a blurred version of the texture of a coffee-stained Styrofoam cup. To portray Jones on set, Bill Nighy wore a motion capture tracksuit that meant the animators at Industrial Light &amp; Magic did not have to reshoot the scene in the studio without him or on the motion capture stage. Nighy wore make-up around his eyes and mouth to splice into the computer-generated shots, but they were never used, and Nighy only ever wore a prosthetic once, with blue-colored tentacles for when Will Turner (Orlando Bloom) steals the key to the Dead Man's Chest from under his &quot;beard&quot; as he sleeps. To create the CG version of the character, the model was closely based on a full-body scan of Nighy, with Jones reflecting his high cheekbones. Animators studied every frame of Nighy's performance: the actor himself had blessed them by making his performance more quirky than expected, providing endless fun for them. His performance also meant new controls had to be stored. Finally, Jones' tentacles are mostly a simulation, though at times they were hand-animated when they act as limbs for the character.;;

The Kraken was difficult to animate as it had no real-life reference, until animation director Hal Hickel instructed the crew to watch ''King Kong vs. Godzilla'' which had a real octopus crawling over miniatures.;; On set, two pipes filled with 30,000 pounds of cement were used to crash and split the ''Edinburgh Trader'': Completing the illusion are miniature masts and falling stuntmen shot on a bluescreen stage. The scene where the Kraken spits at Jack Sparrow does not use computer-generated spit: it was real gunge thrown at Johnny Depp.;;

Release and reception
Johnny Depp at the London premiere for the film in July 2006
''Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest'' premiered at Disneyland in Anaheim, California on June 24 2006. It was the first Disney film to use the new computer-generated Disney production logo.;;

The film became available on DVD on December 5 2006 for Region 1, and sold 10.5 million copies in its first week of sales, thus becoming the biggest home video debut of 2006.;; The versions for Regions 2 and 4 had already been released on November 15 2006 and November 20 2006, respectively.;; The DVD, incompatible with some Region 1 hardware DVD Players due to the use of ARccOS Protection, came in single and two-disc versions. Both contained an commentary track with the screenwriters and a gag reel, with the double-disc featuring a video of the film premiere and a number of documentaries, including a full-length documentary entitled &quot;According to the Plan&quot; and eight featurettes. The film was released on Blu-ray Disc on May 22 2007.;;

=Box office=
The film broke two North American records upon release, largest opening day gross with $55.8 million, beating the previous year's ''Star Wars: Episode III - Revenge of the Sith'' by 11% , and biggest opening weekend gross with $135.6 million, beating 2002's ''Spider-Man (film)|Spider-Man'' ;; The film set 15 other box office records, including the fastest film to reach $200 and $300 million, the highest ten-day gross, and the fastest film to reach $1 billion worldwide.

The film ended with $423 million domestically and just over $1 billion worldwide, becoming the sixth highest grossing film domestically and the third highest worldwide, behind ''Titanic'' and ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (film)|The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King''. Adjusted for inflation, the film is the 44th highest grossing domestically.;;

=Critical reaction=
After months of anticipation and industry hype, reviews for ''Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest'' were mixed, as the film scored a 54% &quot;Rotten&quot; rating on Rotten Tomatoes.;; Among the positive critics were Michael Booth of the Denver Post, who awarded the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, praising it as &quot;two hours and 20 minutes of escapism that once again makes the movies safe for guilt-free fun.&quot;;; Drew McWeeny was highly positive, comparing the film to ''The Empire Strikes Back'', and also acclaimed its darkness in its depiction of the crew of the ''Flying Dutchman'' and its cliffhanger.;; The completely Computer-generated imagery|computer-generated Davy Jones turned out to be so realistic that some reviewers mistakenly identified Nighy as wearing prosthetic makeup.;;;;;;

On the other hand, critic Michael Medved gave the film two stars out of four, calling the plot &quot;sloppy, ...convoluted and insipid.&quot;;; Paul Arendt of the BBC negatively compared it to ''The Matrix Reloaded'', as a complex film that merely led onto the next film.;; Following the release of ''Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End'', some reviewers looked back at the second film as having a minuscule role in the storyline: Russ Fischer criticized screenwriters Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio for not making anything bar the cliffhanger matter too much in the third film,;; with Todd Gilchrist pointing out the cannibal encounter as completely unnecessary.;; Richard George felt a &quot;better construct of ''Dead Man's Chest'' and ''At World's End'' would have been to take 90 minutes of Chest, mix it with all of End and then cut that film in two.&quot;;; Alex Billington felt the third film, &quot;almost makes the second film in the series obsolete or dulls it down enough that we can accept it in our trilogy DVD collections without ever watching it.&quot;;;

=Controversy=
Walt Disney Pictures has been questioned by the National Garifuna Council, a representative body of the Garifuna people, for what they feel is a racist portrayal of the Calinago, or Caribs, as cannibals in ''Dead Man's Chest''. The Council called for what they considered a fair and accurate representation, and Disney responded that the script could not be altered. No known changes were made to the film.;;;;

=Awards=
At the 79th annual Academy Awards, visual effects supervisors John Knoll, Hal Hickel, Charles Gibson and Allen Hall won an Oscar for Best Visual Effects. The film was also nominated for Best Art Direction, Sound Editing and Sound Mixing. 

The film also won a BAFTA and Satellite award for Best Visual Effects,;; and six awards from the Visual Effects Society.;;

Other awards won by the film include Choice Movie: Action Adventure, Choice Drama/Action Adventure Movie, Actor for Johnny Depp at the 2006 Teen Choice Awards; Favorite Movie, Dramatic Movie, Male Actor for Depp and On-Screen Couple for Depp and Keira Knightley at the 2006 People's Choice Awards; Best Movie and Performance for Depp at the 2007 MTV Movie Awards and Best Special Effects at the Saturn Awards.;;

References


External links

*[http://disney.go.com/disneypictures/pirates/ Official site]
*[http://madeinatlantis.com/pirates/production/ Production notes]
*
*
*
*
*[http://pirates.wikia.com/wiki/Pirates_of_the_Caribbean:_Dead_Man's_Chest Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest] at the [http://pirates.wikia.com ''Pirates of the Caribbean'' wiki]





Category:2006 films
Category:Action comedy films
Category:American films
Category:Best Visual Effects Academy Award winners
Category:Disney films
Category:English-language films
Category:Films based on theme-park attractions
Category:Films shot in Super 35
Category:Pirates of the Caribbean
Category:Sequel films
Category:Swashbuckler films
Category:Treasure hunt films

als:Fluch der Karibik 2
ar:قراصنة الكاريبي: صندوق الرجل الميت
bs:Pirati s Kariba: Mrtvačeva škrinja
bg:Карибски пирати: Сандъкът на мъртвеца
da:Pirates of the Caribbean: Død Mands Kiste
de:Pirates of the Caribbean – Fluch der Karibik 2
et:Kariibi mere piraadid: Surnud mehe aardekirst
es:Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
fr:Pirates des Caraïbes, le secret du coffre maudit
hr:Pirati s Kariba: Mrtvačeva škrinja
id:Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
it:Pirati dei Caraibi: La maledizione del forziere fantasma
he:שודדי הקאריביים (סרט)
hu:A Karib-tenger kalózai: Holtak kincse
nl:Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
ja:パイレーツ・オブ・カリビアン/デッドマンズ・チェスト
no:Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
pl:Piraci z Karaibów: Skrzynia umarlaka
pt:Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
ro:Piraţii din Caraibe: Cufărul omului mort
ru:Пираты Карибского моря: Сундук мертвеца
sq:Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
sk:Piráti Karibiku: Truhlica mŕtveho muža
sr:Пирати са Кариба: Тајна шкриње
fi:Pirates of the Caribbean: Kuolleen miehen kirstu
sv:Pirates of the Caribbean - Död mans kista
tr:Karayip Korsanları: Ölü Adamın Sandığı
zh:加勒比海盗2